---
title: Reading Response 3
author: Arden Rasmussen
date: \today{}
indent: true
geometry: margin=1in
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{setspace}
  - \doublespacing
---

Daochuo came to this conclusion from two major parts from the *Sutra of the
Bodhisattva Candragarbha*. The first part that he notes is that we are in the
fourth five hundred years, where the faith is established through the
cultivation of merits and repentance. He also mentions the delivering sentient
beings through name, this will eliminate impediments to the Path. And as it is
stated in the *Sutra on the Contemplation of the Buddha of Limitless Life*, "If
you invoke the name of Amitabha Buddha for even a single instant you will be
able to expel sins accumulated over eighty million aeons of lifetimes".  Thus
according to this sutra, and as Daochuo mentions, the clear best method is to
constantly recite the names of a Buddha. He concludes this because of the ease
of achieving enlightenment with this method. Because if all a layperson needs
to do is recite the name of Amitabha, and they will be put on the path to
enlightenment, then complete devotion should accelerate a monk far along the
path.

In *The Difficult Path and the Easy Path* Daochuo says that there is the hard
path, where one must fight against misguided teachings, evil people, and the
reliance on self-power, which makes the path practically impossible to achieve.
Then the easy path is by vowing devotion to Amitabha and making a great
determination to achieve Buddhahood. Just this vow is enough to set one the
path to be reborn in the Land of Bliss. Then once one is in the land of bliss
they are guaranteed to be on their second to the last rebirth. Thus if to jump
to such an advanced stage of a bodhisattva to only be one rebirth away from
enlightenment, then simply devoting oneself to Amitabha is the most effective
method for achieving enlightenment.

In *The Parable of the White Path* a voice from the west bank, which is
intended to be compared to the vow of Amitabha, who calls out to the man and
says "I can protect you. Never fear falling into the fire or water!". This
voice is claiming that it alone can protect people from falling astray from the
path to Buddhahood, and it will protect them. Thus inferring that devotion
Amitabha will prevent any monk from being lead astray from the path.

With these considerations in mind, it becomes clear that complete devotion to
Amitabha will prevent deviation from the path to enlightenment, and it provides
the shortest route to achieving enlightenment, in only a few rebirths. The
other methods of following the path are difficult and are easy to diverge from
the correct way. Thus logically the only appropriate way to practice Buddhism
is to devote once self to Amitabha and utilize his merit to advance oneself
along the path to enlightenment. If Daochuo considered these aspects, then he
would have also come to this same conclusion that devotion to Amitabha is the
most appropriate Buddhist practice in this current era.

---
Words: 519
