---
title: Reading Response 1
author: Arden Rasmussen
date: \today{}
indent: true
geometry: margin=1in
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{setspace}
  - \doublespacing
...

Having an understanding of "No-Self" is useful for escaping samsara in many
ways. The first stage in escaping from samsara is to understand the problem of
samsara. Having an understanding of "No-self", is a large step towards
understanding samsara.

One important aspect of no-self is the fact that nirvana was considered to be
obtained by non-attachment (Harvey, 59). If Nirvana is to be obtained by total
non-attachment, then the consideration of a true self or eternal self
contradicts this. Only when one understands that there is no eternal self, and
can accept this and acknowledge the teachings of no-self, then one can work
further towards the goal of escaping samsara and achieving nirvana. Harvey
later states "While Nirvana is beyond change and suffering, it has nothing in
it which could support the feeling of I-ness; for this can only arise with
respect tot eh khandhas" (Harvey, 60). If Nirvana cannot even support the
feeling of I-ness, then it would be reasonable that before being able to
achieve nirvana, one must acknowledge the no-self, and remove all sense and
feeling of I-ness. As if those feelings cannot exist in nirvana, then one who
has these feelings would not be able to achieve nirvana, until the removal of
these feelings.

Even the belief in a permanent or eternal self is a cause of dukkha, and causes
rebirth and thus samsara. As Harvey mentions "rebirth does not require a
permanent Self or substantial 'I', but belief in such a thing is one of the
things that causes rebirth" (Harvey, 62). Thus it can be concluded that without
an understanding of no-self, it is impossible to escape samsara, as the belief
in a self will alone cause rebirth.

In "Questions of Milinda" the understanding of no-self helps in developing a
deeper understanding of karma. On the night that the Buddha gained
enlightenment, the first stage of this was gaining an understanding of the
inner workings of karma. So developing a greater understanding of karma would
most likely help in the path to escaping samsara. In the section "WHAT, THEN,
IS REBORN?" Milinda asks what is reborn if there is no continuous self. In
response NƒÅgasena tell the king "with one Name-and-Form Karmma is wrought, a
man does good or evil deeds, and by the power of this Karmma, another
Name-and-Form is reborn. Therefore he is not released from his evil deeds"
("Questions of Milinda", 97). Clearly, in this excerpt, Nagasena is explaining
some of the workings of karma, and these workings can only be understood, with
an understanding of no-self which has been developed throughout their
conversation before this statement.

Clearly understanding the teachings of no-self is vitally important for both
advancing one's understanding of karma, and dukkha, but also without an
understanding of no-self, it would be impossible to achieve nirvana and will
also lead to being reborn, and thus it is impossible to escape samsara. From
these few arguments it becomes clear that although the Buddha did not mention
the teachings of "no-self", it is vital and necessary to understand these
teachings to escape from samsara and achieve nirvana.

---
Words: 517
