---
title: Cinematographic style in Soviet Film
author: Arden Rasmussen
documentclass: amsart
linestretch: 2.0
indent: true
---

Soviet era films were either approved by the government, or they where
suppressed by the government. The primary distinction between these different
sets of films was their portrayal of soviet society, and communist ideals. Many
of the films that were suppressed by the government were critical of soviet
society, or they could be interpreted as critical of society. The films that
were officially supported by the government, there was no possible way to
interpret them as critical of soviet society, they were inarguably pro
communism. Soviet films of the 1970-1980s possess two distinct cinematographic
style. Films which have been categorized as non-approved films share a simpler
cinematographic style, which is distance from the style government approved
films.

Camera movement represents an important role in modern film, and in the early
days of film, cameras were not able to be moved as freely. In many of the
earliest films, most of the scenes consisted of static wide camera, because it
was not possible for easy camera motion or angling. The cinematography of films
can be split into three different components, the angle, the distance, and the
cameras movement. The combinations of these components distinguish different
types of cinematography. Each of the different components of the framing can be
used to affect ones interpretation of the film. For example, a camera that is
very mobile could infer a more fast paced scene, or a more frantic one.

In non-approved films, such as those by German, specifically *Hard to be a
God*(2013), use large amounts of motion, lots of not straight framing, and
significantly more dynamic and active camera motion, to convey an air of
confusion, and disorientation. Contrastingly films that were approved by the
government such as Viktorov's *Per Aspera Ad Astra*(1981), primary use table
cameras, and smooth directed motion, resulting in a more grounded and clear
film.  Although these films came out at significantly different dates, *Hard to
be a God* exemplifies Aleksei German's cinematographic style which he had already
developed by his earlier films, and in his film *My Friend Ivan Lapshin*(1984),
which is a contemporary of *Per Aspera Ad Astra*, also clearly demonstrates this
cinematographic style.

# Outline

*Per Aspera Ad Astra* was clearly a critique of capitalist society, it is clear
that the planet Dessa represents a capitalist society, which needed to be saved
by the superior technology of the communist Earth. This clear support of
communism and critique of capitalism is why this film was approved by the
government, as it at no point raised any questions about communism.

*Hard to be a God* is not unabashedly supportive of communist society. In fact,
there are many connections that can be made to the film directly commenting on
the shortcomings of communism and the soviet union. Throughout the film there
is a connection from the Greys and the Blacks to the Soviet union and the
government leaders. This relatively clear critique on soviet society and
communist ideals would have clearly resulted in this film being disapproved of
by the government.

## Camera stability
HG is very shaky, and appears to be hand held, and lots of movement, while PAAA
was very stable, and for the most part either appeared to be on a tripod, or a
dolly, but for the most part it was stationary or a simple pan. The instability
of HG results in a more chaotic feeling film. This chaotic feeling results in
some estrangement, forcing the viewer to more actively pay attention to what is
happening causing more critical though, this forced attention that the viewer
must allows for a more nuanced critique of soviet society.

## Framing
All camera motion in PAAA is intended to keep the focus in frame at all times.
In HG the camera appears to have a mind of its own, frequently loosing
attention and drifting off of the main focus. The cameras tendency to leave the
focus, and to wanders about the scene, or the number of times that the camera
was obstructed by a different object, or other characters, removed the ability
for passive viewing of the film. Without the ability to view the film passively
forces the audience to more closely consider the social critiques of that are
presented in the film. The audience is no longer able to passively view the
movie and enjoyed as a mindless spectator, but they are required to think about
the meaning and commentary that is presented in the film. 

* PAAA In their house the camera moves very slowly and deliberately. A clear
example of this is (16:25-16:50) the camera moves across a small room very
slowly and smoothly, primarily to keep the mothers face in frame.
* I need to find a specific instance where HG has the camera wander off in to
    some random direction.


## Use of 4th wall break?
In both films the characters often look directly at the camera, but only in HG
do the characters actively interact with the camera, there are many instances
of characters tapping on or waving at the camera. This makes the viewer feel
more like a part of the action, and that the are another character in the film.
The placement of the view as another character of the film, encourages the
viewer to consider how they would feel if they live in that kind of society,
and how they would react to the connections to communism and the soviet union.
The placement of the view in the film, provides a better connection to with
their current lives and they are better able to relate the critiques that the
film presents to their modern lives, and consider how it effects them
personally.

* Opening shots from HG with people in street making motions to camera
* Right after he wakes up on the street, I'm pretty sure that someone tapped on
the camera.
* PAAA Will very occasionally place the camera in the point of view of a
character, this is most clearly one with the octopus thing, that they are
transporting (58:35).

# Conclusion

The soviet films that were critical of communist society, employ a number of
cinematographic techniques that are intended to cause estrangement in the user,
and providing a better relation between the viewer and the world that is
depicted in the film. This estrangement and the confusion caused by the cameras
motion force the viewer to consider the social critique that has been presented
in the film. Contrastingly films that were government approved, and were
primarily critical of capitalist society, allowed the user to more passively
view the film, and did not require any additional consideration on the viewers
part.

The cinematographic style of the films that were critical of soviet society,
were commonly the same, this style is clearly represented in German's films.
This style of film forces the viewer to more actively engage in the film, and
removed the ability for passive viewing leading to a more critical consideration
of the social commentary that is presented in the film. It has been noticed
that this style of cinematography is similar to American films of the time
that were critical of American society. This is reasonable as all the of the
techniques are not directly commenting on any specific society, but are instead
forcing the audience to more critically think about the film that they are
watching So it would make sense that the same techniques could be used to
encourage critique of any society.
