---
title: Midterm Paper
author: Arden Rasmussen
documentclass: armath
date: \today{}
indent: true
---

Throughout science fiction, the depiction of science and technology can play a
critical role in the development of the underlying themes, and arguments of the
author. In the novel *Red Star* by Alexander Bagdanov technology is used many
times to support Bogdanov's sociological theories and opinions about socialism.
Specifically, his depictions of technology develop the importance of global
unity for the establishment of a successful communist society. Throughout the
novel, Bagdanov depicts the importance of having society be united globally for
his depiction of communism to be successful. He then utilizes the depiction of
technology throughout the novel to advance this idea, and reinforce the
argument for the global unification of society as a prerequisite for a
successful communist utopia.

One point when the selflessness of the Martians is exemplified, and is used to
demonstrate it necessity for the development of an idealized communist society
is on the space ship during the trip to mars. At the begging of the trip, Menni
explains to Leonid how the crew of the space ship work together. When Leonid
asks if Menni is the captain he responds by saying

> But that doesn't mean that I have the power of a commanding officer. It
> simply means that I have the most experience flying spaceships and my orders
> are accepted, the same way that I accept the astronomical calculations which
> Sterni makes, or as we accept Netti's medical advice because we want to
> retain our health and strength.

Here Menni explains that there is no hierarchy on the space ship, and that
everyone simply trusts the knowledge and experience of the others. If any one
person was selfish and did not trust the knowledge of the others, then this
social structure laking a hierarchy would not function. This social structure
can only function if everyone considers themselves equals to everyone else, and
only defers based upon experience. This structure of society, which has been
condensed to be represented by the society of the crew of the ship, is directly
what Bagdanov considers an ideal social structure for communism. There are no
leaders, and no slaves, everyone is on equal ground, and work only to serve the
greater good for the community. This depiction of the techonology of the space
craft, and the social structure that is used to run it demonstrates the
neccesity for the martians of the spaceship to be selfless and work as a single
union.

A second majro point when the use of technology is used to advance Bogdanov's
is in the depiction of the workforce on mars. The organization of industry and
production on mars is handled by the Institute of Statistics. The Intitute of
Statistics keeps statistics on the surplus and shortage of products from all of
the industries on the planet. The Institute of Statistics and the social
structure that it represents is only possible if everyone in society is
extreamly selfless. Menni explains this process to Leonid "The tables are meant
to affect the distribution of labor", he then goes on to explain "The Institute
then computes the difference between the existing and the desired situation for
each vocational area and communicates the result to all places of employment.
Equilibrium is stoon established by a stream of volunteers". This entire
process which is demonstrates the technological advancements for the
distribution of labor, is entirly relient on the martians willingness to work
for the greater good, and to act selflessly when the need arrises. Bogdanovs
depiction of the Intitution of Statistics, and the underlying distributed
workforce of mars, is entirly relient on the population of mars volenteering to
where the work is needed. The only case where the martians would volenteer for
new jobs, is if they are selfless enough, and believe in the global unity of
their society, such that they acknowledge and act on the fact that they must
work for the greater good of martians, not for their individual goals.

These three depictions of technology in Bogdanovs *Red Star* demonstrate the
importance of the selflessness of the society, and the global unity. None of
these pieces of technology would be function properly if the martians were not
inherently selfless or if there were any conflicting parties. That is to say
the only way that these technological advancements can function is if the
entierty of mars is unified, and is naturally selfless.

The fact that these technological advancements are primarily dependent on the
struture of the society in which they exist, then it could be argued that those
are the primary limitations for the development of this type of technology.
Dispite the fact that much of the society on mars has developed into a perfict
society, but many of these advancements in the martian technology is primarly
based upon the societal unity and selflesness. This would indicate that if this
form of societal unity and selflesness can be developed on the Earth, then it
could indicate that this form of technology and society could be possible on
the earth.
