---
title: R.U.R.
author: Karel Capeck
fontsize: 10pt
documentclass: armath
---

# Act One

## CENTRAL OFFICE OF THE FACTORY OF ROSSUM\'S UNIVERSAL ROBOTS

Central office of the factory of Rossum\'s Universal Robots. Entrance on
the right. The windows on the front wall look out on the rows of factory
chimneys. On the left more managing departments. DOMIN is sitting in the
revolving chair at a large American writing table. On the left-hand wall
large maps showing steamship and railroad routes. On the right-hand wall
are fastened printed placards. (\"Robot\'s Cheapest Labor,\" and so on.)
In contrast to these wall fittings, the floor is covered with a splendid
Turkish Carpet, a sofa, leather armchair, and filing cabinets. At a desk
near the windows SULLA is typing letters.

DOMIN (*dictating*). Ready?

SULLA. Yes.

DOMIN. To E.M. McVicker and Co., Southampton, England. \"We undertake no
guarantee for goods damaged in transit. As soon as the consignment was
taken on board we drew your captain\'s attention to the fact that the
vessel was unsuitable for the transport of Robots, and we are therefore
not responsible for spoiled freight. We beg to remain, for Rossum\'s
Universal Robots. Yours truly.\" (SULLA, *who has sat motionless during
dictation, now types rapidly for a few seconds, then stops, withdrawing
the completed letter.*) Ready?

SULLA. Yes.

DOMIN. Another letter. To the E. B. Huyson Agency, New York, U.S.A. \"We
beg to acknowledge receipt of order for five thousand Robots. As you are
sending your own vessel, please dispatch as cargo equal quantities of
soft and hard coal for R.U.R., the same to be credited as part payment
of the amount due to us. We beg to remain, for Rossum\'s Universal
Robots. Yours truly.\" (SULLA *repeats the rapid typing.*) Ready?

SULLA. Yes.

DOMIN. Another letter. \"Friedrichswerks, Hamburg, Germany. We beg to
acknowledge receipt of order for fifteen thousand Robots.\" (*Telephone
rings.*) Hello! This is the Central Office. Yes. Certainly. Well, send
them a wire. Good. (*Hangs up telephone.*) Where did I leave off?

SULLA. \"We beg to acknowledge receipt of order for fifteen thousand
Robots.\"

DOMIN: Fifteen thousand R. Fifteen thousand R.\


\[*Enter* MARIUS.\]Well, what is it?


MARIUS. There\'s a lady, sir, asking to see you.

DOMIN. A lady? Who is she?

MARIUS. I don\'t know, sir. She brings this card of introduction.

DOMIN (*reads the card*). Ah, from President Glory. Ask her to come in.

MARIUS. Please step this way. (*Exit* MARIUS.)

\[*Enter* HELENA GLORY.\]

HELENA. How do you do?

DOMIN. How do you do. (*Standing up.*) What can I do for you?

HELENA. You are Mr. Domin, the General Manager.

DOMIN. I am.

HELENA. I have come\--

DOMIN. With President Glory\'s card. That is quite sufficient.

HELENA. President Glory is my father. I am Helena Glory.

DOMIN. Miss Glory, this is such a great honor for us to be allowed to
welcome our great President\'s daughter, that\--

HELENA. That you can\'t show me the door?

DOMIN. Please sit down. Sulla, you may go. (*Exit* SULLA.) (*Sitting
down.*) How can I be of service to you, Miss Glory?

HELENA. I have come\--

DOMIN. To have a look at our famous works where people are manufactured.
Like all visitors. Well, there is no objection.

HELENA. I thought it was forbidden to\--

DOMIN. To enter the factory. Yes, of course. Everybody comes here with
someone\'s visiting card, Miss Glory.

HELENA. And you show them\--

DOMIN. Only certain things. The manufacture of artificial people is a
secret process.

HELENA. If you only knew how enormously that\--

DOMIN. Interests me. Europe\'s talking about nothing else.

HELENA. Why don\'t you let me finish speaking?

DOMIN. I beg your pardon. Did you want to say something different?

HELENA. I only wanted to ask\--

DOMIN. Whether I could make a special exception in your case and

show you our factory. Why, certainly, Miss Glory.

HELENA. How do you know I wanted to say that?

DOMIN. They all do. But we shall consider it a special honor to show you
more than we do the rest.

HELENA. Thank you.

DOMIN. But you must agree not to divulge the least\...

HELENA (*standing up and giving him her hand*). My word of honor.

DOMIN. Thank you. Won\'t you raise your veil?

HELENA. Of course. You want to see whether I\'m a spy or not. I beg your
pardon.

DOMIN. What is it?

HELENA. Would you mind releasing my hand?

DOMIN (*releasing it*). I beg your pardon.

HELENA (*raising her veil*). How cautious you have to be here, don\'t
you?

DOMIN (*observing her with deep interest*). Hm, of course\-- we\-- that
is\--

HELENA. But what is it? What\'s the matter?

DOMIN. I\'m remarkably pleased. Did you have a pleasant crossing?

HELENA. Yes.

DOMIN No difficulty?

HELENA. Why?

DOMIN. What I mean to say is\-- you\'re so young.

HELENA. May we go straight into the factory?

DOMIN. Yes. Twenty-two, I think.

HELENA. Twenty-two what?

DOMIN. Years.

HELENA. Twenty-one. Why do you want to know?

DOMIN. Because\-- as\-- (*With enthusiasm.*) you will make a long stay,
won\'t you?

HELENA. That depends on how much of the factory you show me.

DOMIN. Oh, hang the factory. Oh, no, no, you shall see everything, Miss
Glory. Indeed you shall. Won\'t you sit down?

HELENA *(crossing to couch and sitting).* Thank you.

DOMIN. But first would you like to hear the story of the invention?

HELENA. Yes, indeed.

DOMIN (*observes HELENA with rapture, and reels off rapidly).* It was in
the year 1920 that old Rossum, the great physiologist, who was then
quite a young scientist, took himself to this distant island for the
purpose of studying the ocean fauna, full stop. On this occasion he
attempted by chemical synthesis to imitate the living matter known as
protoplasm until he suddenly discovered a substance which behaved
exactly like living matter although its chemical composition was
different. That was in the year of 1932, exactly four hundred and forty
years after the discovery of America. Whew!

HELENA. Do you know that by heart?

DOMIN. Yes. You see, physiology is not in my line. Shall I go on?

HELENA. Yes, please.

DOMIN. And then, Miss Glory, old Rossum wrote the following among his
chemical specimens: \"Nature has found only one method of organizing
living matter. There is, however, another method, more simple, flexible
and rapid, which has not yet occurred to nature at all. This second
process by which life can be developed was discovered by me today.\" Now
imagine him, Miss Glory, writing those wonderful words over some
colloidal mess that a dog wouldn\'t look at. Imagine him sitting over a
test tube, and thinking how the whole tree of life would grow from it,
how all animals would proceed from it, beginning with some sort of
beetle and ending with a man. A man of different substance from us. Miss
Glory, that was a tremendous moment.

HELENA. Well?

DOMIN. Now, the thing was how to get the life out of the test tubes, and
hasten development and form organs, bones and nerves and so on, and find
such substances as catalytics, enzymes, hormones, and so forth, in
short\-- you understand?

HELENA. Not much, I\'m afraid.

DOMIN. Never mind. You see, with the help of his tinctures he could make
whatever he wanted. He could have produced a Medusa with the brain of a
Socrates or a worm fifty yards long. But being without a grain of humor,
he took it into his head to make a vertebrate or perhaps a man. This
artificial living matter of his had a raging thirst for life. It didn\'t
mind being sewn or mixed together. That couldn\'t be done with natural
albumen. And that\'s how he set about it.

HELENA. About what?

DOMIN. About imitating nature. First of all he tried making an
artificial dog. That took him several years, and resulted in a sort of
stunted calf which died in a few days. I\'ll show it to you in the
museum. And then old Rossum started on the manufacture of man.

HELENA. And I must divulge this to nobody?

DOMIN. To nobody in the world.

HELENA. What a pity that it\'s to be found in all the schoolbooks of
both Europe and America.

DOMIN. Yes. But do you know what isn\'t in the schoolbooks? That old
Rossum was mad. Seriously, Miss Glory, you must keep this to yourself.
The old crank wanted to actually make people.

HELENA. But you do make people.

DOMIN. Approximately, Miss Glory. But old Rossum meant it literally. He
wanted to become a sort of scientific substitute for God. He was a
fearful materialist, and that\'s why he did it all. His sole purpose was
nothing more or less than to prove that God was no longer necessary. Do
you know anything about anatomy?

HELENA. Very little.

DOMIN. Neither do I. Well, he then decided to manufacture everything as
in the human body. I\'ll show you in the museum the bungling attempt it
took him ten years to produce. It was to have been a man, but it lived
for three days only. Then up came young Rossum, an engineer. He was a
wonderful fellow, Miss Glory. When he saw what a mess of it the old man
was making, he said: \"It\'s absurd to spend ten years making a man. If
you can\'t make him quicker than nature, you might as well shut up
shop.\" Then he set about learning anatomy himself

HELENA. There\'s nothing about that in the schoolbooks.

DOMIN. No. The schoolbooks are full of paid advertisements, and rubbish
at that. What the schoolbooks say about the united efforts of the two
great Rossums is all a fairy tale. They used to have dreadful rows. The
old atheist hadn\'t the slightest conception of industrial matters, and
the end of it was that young Rossum shut him up in some laboratory or
other and let him fritter the time away with his monstrosities, while he
himself started on the business from an engineer\'s point of view. Old
Rossum cursed him, and before he died he managed to botch up two
physiological honors. Then one day they found him dead in the
laboratory. And that\'s his whole story.

HELENA. And what about the young man?

DOMIN. Well, anyone who has looked into human anatomy will have seen at
once that man is too complicated, and that a good engineer could make
him more simply. So young Rossum began to overhaul anatomy and tried to
see what could be left out or simplified. In short\-- but this isn\'t
boring you, Miss Glory?

HELENA. No indeed. You\'re\-- it\'s awfully interesting.

DOMIN. So young Rossum said to himself: \"A man is something that feels
happy, plays the piano, likes going for a walk, and in fact wants to do
a whole lot of things that are really unnecessary.

HELENA. Oh.

DOMIN. That are unnecessary when he wants, let us say, to weave or
count. Do you play the piano?

HELENA. Yes.

DOMIN. That\'s good. But a working machine must not play the piano, must
not feel happy, must not do a whole lot of other things. A gasoline
motor must not have tassels or ornaments, Miss Glory. And to manufacture
artificial workers is the same thing as to manufacture gasoline motors.
The process must be of the simplest, and the product of the best from a
practical point of view. What sort of worker do you think is the best
from a practical point of view?

HELENA. What?

DOMIN. What sort of worker do you think is the best from a practical
point of view?

HELENA. Perhaps the one who is most honest and hard-working.

DOMIN. No; the one that is the cheapest. The one whose requirements are
the smallest. Young Rossum invented a worker with the minimum amount of
requirements. He had to simplify him. He rejected everything that did
not contribute directly to the progress of work\-- everything that makes
man more expensive. In fact, he rejected man and made the Robot. My dear
Miss Glory, the Robots are not people. Mechanically they are more
perfect than we are; they have an enormously developed intelligence, but
they have no soul.

HELENA. How do you know they\'ve no soul?

DOMIN. Have you ever seen what a Robot looks like inside?

HELENA. No.

DOMIN. Very neat, very simple. Really, a beautiful piece of work. Not
much in it, but everything in flawless order. The product of an engineer
is technically at a higher pitch of perfection than a product of nature.

HELENA. But man is supposed to be the product of God.

DOMIN. All the worse. God hasn\'t the least notion of modern
engineering. Would you believe that young Rossum then proceeded to play
at being God?

HELENA. How do you mean?

DOMIN. He began to manufacture Super-Robots. Regular giants they were.
He tried to make them twelve feet tall. But you wouldn\'t believe what a
failure they were.

HELENA. A failure?

DOMIN. Yes. For no reason at all their limbs used to keep snapping off.
Evidently our planet is too small for giants. Now we make only Robots of
normal size and of very high-class human finish.

HELENA. I saw the first Robots at home. The town council bought them
for\-- I mean engaged them for work.

DOMIN. Bought them, dear Miss Glory. Robots are bought and sold.

HELENA These were employed as street sweepers. I saw them sweeping. They
were so strange and quiet.

DOMIN. Rossum\'s Universal Robot factory doesn\'t produce a uniform
brand of Robots. We have Robots of finer and coarser grades. The best
will live about twenty-years. (*He rings for* MARIUS.)

HELENA. Then they die?

DOMIN. Yes, they get used up.

\[*Enter* MARIUS.\]

Marius, bring in samples of the Manual Labor Robot. (*Exit* MARIUS.)

I\'ll show you specimens of the two extremes. This first grade is
comparatively inexpensive and is made in vast quantities.

\[MARIUS *reenters with two Manual Labor Robots.*\]

There you are; as powerful as a small tractor. Guaranteed to have
average intelligence. That will do, Marius. (MARIUS *exits with
Robots.*)


HELENA. They make me feel so strange.

DOMIN *(rings).* Did you see my new typist? (*He rings for* SULLA)

HELENA. I didn\'t notice her.

\[*Enter* SULLA.\]

DOMIN. Sulla, let Miss Glory see you.

HELENA. So pleased to meet you. You must find it terribly dull in this
out-of-the-way spot, don\'t you?

SULLA. I don\'t know, Miss Glory.

HELENA. Where do you come from?

SULLA. From the factory.

HELENA. Oh, you were born there?

SULLA. I was made there.

HELENA. What?

DOMIN (*laughing*). Sulla is a Robot, best grade.

HELENA. Oh, I beg your pardon.

DOMIN. Sulla isn\'t angry. See, Miss Glory, the kind of skin we make.
(*Feels the skin on* SULLA\'S *face.*) Feel her face.

HELENA. Ah, no, no.

DOMIN. You wouldn\'t know that she\'s made of different material from
us, would you? Turn round, Sulla.

HELENA. Oh, stop, stop.

DOMIN. Talk to Miss Glory, Sulla.

SULLA. Please sit down. (HELENA *sits.*) Did you have a pleasant
crossing?

HELENA. Oh, yes, certainly.

SULLA. Don\'t go back on the *Amelia,* Miss Glory. The barometer is
falling steadily. Wait for the *Pennsylvania.* That\'s a good, powerful
vessel.

DOMIN. What\'s its speed?

SULLA. Twenty knots. Fifty thousand tons. Captain Harpy, eight
boilers\--

DOMIN. That\'ll do Sulla. Now show us your knowledge of French.

HELENA. You know French?

SULLA. I know four languages. I can write: Dear Sir, Monsieur, Geehrter
Herr, Cteny pane.

HELENA (*jumping up*). Oh, that\'s absurd! Sulla isn\'t a Robot. Sulla
is a girl like me. Sulla, this is outrageous! Why do you take part in
such a hoax?

SULLA. I am a Robot.

HELENA No, no, you are not telling the truth. I know they\'ve forced you
to do it for an advertisement. Sulla, you are a girl like me, aren\'t
you?

DOMIN. I\'m sorry, Miss Glory. Sulla is a Robot.

HELENA. It\'s a lie!

DOMIN. What? (*Rings.*) Excuse me, Miss Glory, then I must convince you.


\[*Enter* MARIUS.\]


Marius, take Sulla into the dissecting room, and tell them to open her
up at once.

HELENA. Where?

DOMIN. Into the dissecting room. When they\'ve cut her open, you can go
and have a look.

HELENA. No, no!

DOMIN. Excuse me, you spoke of lies.

HELENA. You wouldn\'t have her killed?

DOMIN. You can\'t kill machines.

HELENA. Don\'t be afraid, Sulla; I won\'t let you go. Tell me, my dear,
are they always so cruel to you? You mustn\'t put up with it, Sulla. You
mustn\'t.

SULLA. I am a Robot.

HELENA. That doesn\'t matter. Robots are just as good as we are. Sulla,
you wouldn\'t let yourself be cut to pieces?

SULLA. Yes.

HELENA. Oh, you\'re not afraid of death, then?

SULLA. I cannot tell, Miss Glory.

HELENA. Do you know what would happen to you in there?

SULLA. Yes, I should cease to move.

HELENA. How dreadful!

DOMIN. Marius, tell Miss Glory what you are.

MARIUS. Marius, the Robot.

DOMIN. Would you take Sulla into the dissecting room?

MARIUS. Yes.

DOMIN, Would you be sorry for her?

MARIUS. I cannot tell.

DOMIN. She would cease to move. They would put her into the stamping
mill.

DOMIN. That is death, Marius. Aren\'t you afraid of death?

MARIUS. No.

DOMIN. You see, Miss Glory, the Robots have no interest in life. They
have no enjoyments. They are less than so much grass.

HELENA. Oh, stop. Send them away.

DOMIN. Marius, Sulla, you may go.

\[*Exeunt* SULLA and MARIUS.\]

HELENA. How terrible! It\'s outrageous what you are doing.

DOMIN. Why outrageous?

HELENA. I don\'t know, but it is. Why do you call her Sulla?

DOMIN. Isn\'t it a nice name?

HELENA. It\'s a man\'s name. Sulla was a Roman general.

DOMIN. Oh, we thought that Marius and Sulla were lovers.

HELENA. Marius and Sulla were generals and fought against each other in
the year\-- I\'ve forgotten now.

DOMIN. Come here to the window.

HELENA. What?

DOMIN. Come here. What do you see?

HELENA. Bricklayers.

DOMIN. Robots. All our work people are Robots. And down there, can you
see anything?

HELENA. Some sort of office.

DOMIN. A countinghouse. And in it\--

HELENA. A lot of officials.

DOMIN. Robots. All our officials are Robots. And when you see the
factory\-- (*Factory whistle blows.*) Noon. We have to blow the whistle
because the Robots don\'t know when to stop work. In two hours I will
show you the kneading trough.

HELENA. Kneading trough?

DOMIN. The pestle for beating up the paste. In each one we mix the
ingredients for a thousand Robots at one operation. Then there are the
vats for the preparation of liver, brains, and so on. Then you will see
the bone factory. After that I\'ll show you the spinning mill.

HELENA. Spinning mill?

DOMIN. Yes. For weaving nerves and veins. Miles and miles of digestive
tubes pass through it at a time.

HELENA. Mayn\'t we talk about something else?

DOMIN. Perhaps it would be better. There\'s only a handful of us among a
hundred thousand Robots, and not one woman. We talk about nothing but
the factory all day, every day. It\'s just as if we were under a curse,
Miss Glory.

HELENA. I\'m sorry I said you were lying. (*A knock at the door.*)

DOMIN. Come in.

\[*From the right enter* MR. FABRY, DR. GALL, DR. HALLEMEIER, MR.
ALQUIST.\]

DR. GALL. I beg your pardon, I hope we don\'t intrude.

DOMIN. Come in. Miss Glory, here are Alquist, Fabry, Gall, Hallemeier.

This is President Glory\'s daughter.

HELENA. How do you do.

FABRY. We had no idea\--

DR. GALL. Highly honored, I\'m sure\--

ALQUIST. Welcome, Miss Glory.

\[BUSMAN *rushes in from the right.*\]

BUSMAN. Hello, what\'s up?

DOMIN. Come in. Busman. This is Busman, Miss Glory. This is President
Glory\'s daughter.

BUSMAN. By Jove, that\'s fine! Miss Glory may we send a cablegram to the
papers about your arrival?

HELENA. No, no, please don\'t.

DOMIN. Sit down please, Miss Glory.

BUSMAN. Allow me\-- (*Dragging up armchairs.*)

DR. GALL. Please\--

FABRY. Excuse me\--

ALQUIST. What sort of crossing did you have?

DR. GALL. Are you going to stay long?

FABRY. What do you think of the factory, Miss Glory?

HALLEMEIER. Did you come over on the *Amelia*?

DOMIN. Be quiet and let Miss Glory speak.

HELENA (*to* DOMIN). What am I to speak to them about?

DOMIN. Anything you like.

HELENA. Shall may I speak quite frankly.

DOMIN. Why, of course.

HELENA (*wavering, then in desperate resolution*). Tell me, doesn\'t it
ever distress you the way you are treated?

FABRY. By whom, may I ask?

HELENA. Why, everybody.

ALQUJST. Treated?

DR. GALL. What makes you think\--?

HELENA. Don\'t you feel that you might be living a better life?

DR. GALL. Well, that depends on what you mean, Miss Glory.

HELENA. I mean that it\'s perfectly outrageous. It\'s terrible.
(*Standing up.*) The whole of Europe is talking about the way you\'re
being treated. That\'s why I came here, to see for myselt and it\'s a
thousand times worse than could have been imagined. How can you put up
with it?

ALQUIST. Put up with what?

HELENA. Good heavens, you are living creatures, just like us, like the
whole of Europe, like the whole world. It\'s disgraceful that you must
live like this.

BUSMAN. Good gracious, Miss Glory.

FABRY. Well, she\'s not far wrong. We live here just like red Indians.

HELENA. Worse than red Indians. May I, oh, may I call you brothers?

BUSMAN. Why not?

HELENA. Brothers, I have not come here as the President\'s daughter. I
have come on behalf of the Humanity League. Brothers, the Humanity
League now has over two hundred thousand members. Two hundred thousand
people are on your side, and offer you their help.

BUSMAN. Two hundred thousand people! Miss Glory, that\'s a tidy lot. Not
bad.

FABRY. I\'m always telling you there\'s nothing like good old Europe.
You see, they\'ve not forgotten us. They\'re offering us help.

DR. GALL. What help? A theater, for instance?

HALLEMEIER. An orchestra?

SELENA. More than that.

ALQUIST. Just you?

HELENA. Oh, never mind about me. I\'ll stay as Long as it is necessary.

BUSMAN. By Jove, that\'s good.

ALQUIST. Domin, I\'m going to get the best room ready for Miss Glory.

DOMIN. Just a minute. I\'m afraid that Miss Glory is of the opinion that
she has been talking to Robots.

HELENA. Of course.

DOMIN. I\'m sorry. These gentlemen are human beings just like us.

HELENA. You\'re not Robots?

BUSMAN. Not Robots.

HALLEMEIER. Robots indeed!

DR. GALL. No, thanks.

FABRY. Upon my honor, Miss Glory, we aren\'t Robots.

HELENA (*to* DOMIN). Then why did you tell me that all your officials
are Robots?

DOMIN. Yes, the officials, but not the managers. Allow me, Miss Glory:
this is Mr. Fabry, General Technical Manager of R.U.R; Dr. Gall, Head of
the Physiological and Experimental Department; Dr. Hallemeier, Head of
the Institute for the Psychological Training of Robots; Consul Busman,
General Business Manager; and Alquist, Head of the Building Department
of R.U.R.

ALQUIST. Just a builder.

HELENA. Excuse me, gentlemen, for\-- for\-- Have I done something
dreadful?

ALQUIST. Not at all, Miss Glory. Please sit down.

HELENA. I\'m a stupid girl. Send me back by the first ship.

DR. GALL. Not for anything in the world, Miss Glory. Why should we send
you back?

HELENA. Because you know I\'ve come to disturb your Robots for you.

DOMIN. My dear Miss Glory, we\'ve had close upon a hundred saviors and
prophets here. Every ship brings us some. Missionaries, anarchists,
Salvation Army, all sorts. It\'s astonishing what a number of churches
and idiots there are in the world.

HELENA. And you let them speak to the Robots?

DOMIN. So far we\'ve let them all, why not? The Robots remember
everything, but that\'s all. They don\'t even laugh at what the people
say. Really, it is quite incredible. If it would amuse you, Miss Glory,
I\'ll take you over to the Robot warehouse. It holds about three hundred
thousand of them.

BUSMAN. Three hundred and forty-seven thousand.

DOMIN. Good! And you can say whatever you like to them. You can read the
Bible, recite the multiplication table, whatever you please. You can
even preach to them about human rights.

HELENA. Oh, I think that if you were to show them a little love\--

FABRY. Impossible, Miss Glory. Nothing is harder to like than a Robot.

HELENA. What do you make them for, then?

BUSMAN. Ha, ha, ha, that\'s good! What are Robots made for?

FABRY. For work, Miss Glory! One Robot can replace two and a half
workmen. The human machine, Miss Glory, was terribly imperfect. It had
to be removed sooner or later.

BUSMAN. It was too expensive.

FABRY. It was not effective. It no longer answers the requirements of
modern engineering. Nature has no idea of keeping pace with modern
labor. For example: from a technical point of view, the whole of
childhood is a sheer absurdity. So much time lost. And then again\--

HELENA. Oh, no! No!

FABRY. Pardon me. But kindly tell me what is the real aim of your
League\-- the\-- the Humanity League.

HELENA. Its real purpose is to\-- to protect the Robots\-- and\-- and
ensure good treatment for them.

FABRY. Not a bad object, either. A machine has to be treated properly.
Upon my soul, I approve of that. I don\'t like damaged articles. Please,
Miss Glory, enroll us all as contributing, or regular, or foundation
members of your League.

HELENA. No, you don\'t understand me. What we really want is to\-- to
liberate the Robots.

HALLEMEIER. How do you propose to do that?

HELENA. They are to be\--to be dealt with like human beings.

HALLEMEIER. Aha. I suppose they\'re to vote? To drink beer? To order us
about?

HELENA. Why shouldn\'t they drink beer?

HALLEMEIER Perhaps they\'re even to receive wages?

HELENA. Of course they are.

HALLEMEIER Fancy that, now! And what would they do with their wages,
pray?

HELENA. They would buy\-- what they need.. what pleases them.

HALLEMEIER. That would be very nice, Miss Glory, only there\'s nothing
that does please the Robots. Good heavens, what are they to buy? You can
feed them on pineapples, straw, whatever you like. It\'s all the same to
them; they\'ve no appetite at all. They\'ve no interest in anything,
Miss Glory. Why, hang it all, nobody\'s ever yet seen a Robot smile.

HELENA. Why\... why don\'t you make them happier?

HALLEMEIER. That wouldn\'t do, Miss Glory. They are only workmen.

HELENA. Oh, but they\'re so intelligent.

HALLEMEIER. Confoundedly so, but they\'re nothing else. They\'ve no will
of their own. No passion. No soul.

HELENA. No love?

HALLEMEIER. Love? Rather not. Robots don\'t love. Not even themselves.

HELENA Nor defiance?

HALLEMEIER. Defiance? I don\'t know. Only rarely, from time to time.

HELENA. What?

HALLEMEIER. Nothing particular. Occasionally they seem to go off their
heads. Something like epilepsy, you know. It\'s called Robot\'s cramp.
They\'ll suddenly sling down everything they\'re holding, stand still,
gnash their teeth\-- and then they have to go to the stamping mill.
It\'s evidently some breakdown in the mechanism.

DOMIN. A flaw in the works that has to be removed.

SELENA. No, no, that\'s the soul.

FABRY. Do you think that the soul first shows itself by a gnashing of
teeth?

HELENA. Perhaps it\'s a sort of revolt. Perhaps it\'s just a sign that
there\'s a struggle within. Oh, if you could infuse them with it!

DOMIN. That\'ll be remedied, Miss Glory. Dr. Gall is just making some
experiments\--

DR. GALL. Not with regard to that, Domin. At present I am making pain
nerves.

HELENA. Pain nerves?

DR. GALL. Yes, the Robots feel practically no bodily pain. You see,
young Rossum provided them with too limited a nervous system. We must
introduce suffering.

HELENA. Why do you want to cause them pain?

DR. GALL. For industrial reasons, Miss Glory. Sometimes a Robot does
damage to himself because it doesn\'t hurt him. He puts his hand into
the machine, breaks his finger, smashes his head, it\'s all the same to
him. We must provide them with pain. That\'s an automatic protection
against damage.

HELENA. Will they be happier when they feel pain?

DR. GALL. On the contrary; but they will be more perfect from a
technical point of view.

HELENA. Why don\'t you create a soul for them?

DR. GALL. That\'s not in our power.

FABRY. That\'s not in our interest.

BUSMAN. That would increase the cost of production. Hang it all, my dear
young lady, we turn them out at such a cheap rate. A hundred and fifty
dollars each fully dressed, and fifteen years ago they cost ten
thousand. Five years ago we used to buy the clothes for them. Today we
have our own weaving mill, and now we even export cloth five times
cheaper than other factories. What do you pay a yard for cloth, Miss
Glory?

HELENA. I don\'t know really; I\'ve forgotten.

BUSMAN. Good gracious, and you want to found a Humanity League? It only
costs a third now, Miss Glory. All prices are today a third of what they
were and they\'ll fall still lower, lower, like that.

HELENA. I don\'t understand.

BUSMAN. Why, bless you, Miss Glory, it means that the cost of labor has
fallen. A Robot, food and all, costs three-quarters of a cent per hour.
That\'s mighty important, you know. All factories will go pop like
chestnuts if they don\'t at once buy Robots to lower the cost of
production.

HELENA. And get rid of their workmen?

BUSMAN. Of course. But in the meantime, we\'ve dumped five hundred
thousand tropical Robots down on the Argentine pampas to grow corn.
Would you mind telling me how much you pay a pound for bread?

HELENA. I\'ve no idea.

BUSMAN. Well, I\'ll tell you. It now costs two cents in good old Europe.
A pound of bread for two cents, and the Humanity League knows nothing
about it. Miss Glory, you don\'t realize that even that\'s too
expensive. Why, in five years\' time I\'ll wager\--

HELENA. What?

BUSMAN That the cost of everything won\'t be a tenth of what it is now.
Why, in five years we\'ll be up to our ears in corn and everything else.

ALQUIST. Yes, and all the workers throughout the world will be
unemployed.

DOMIN. Yes, Aiquist, they will. Yes, Miss Glory, they will. But in ten
years Rossum\'s Universal Robots will produce so much corn, so much
cloth, so much everything, that things will be practically without
price. There will be no poverty. All work will be done by living
machines. Everybody will be free from worry and liberated from the
degradation of labor. Everybody will live only to perfect himself.

HELENA. Will he?

DOMIN. Of course. It\'s bound to happen. But then the servitude of man
to man and the enslavement of man to matter will cease. Of course,
terrible things may happen at first, but that simply can\'t be avoided.
Nobody will get bread at the price of life and hatred. The Robots will
wash the feet of the beggar and prepare a bed for him in his house.

ALQUIST. Domin, Domin. What you say sounds too much like Paradise. There
was something good in service and something great in humility. There was
some kind of virtue in toil and weariness.

DOMIN. Perhaps. But we cannot reckon with what is lost when we start out
to transform the world. Man shall be free and supreme; he shall have no
other aim, no other labor, no other care than to perfect himself. He
shall serve neither matter nor man. He will not be a machine and a
device for production. He will be Lord of creation.

BUSMAN. Amen.

FABRY. So be it.

HELENA. You have bewildered me\-- I should like\-- I should like to
believe this.

DR. GALL. You are younger than we are, Miss Glory. You will live to see
it.

HALLEMEIER. True. Don\'t you think Miss Glory might lunch with us?

DR. GALL. Of course. Domin, ask on behalf of us all.

DOMIN. Miss Glory, will you do us the honor?

HELENA. When you know why I\'ve come\--

FABRY. For the League of Humanity, Miss Glory.

HELENA. Oh, in that case, perhaps\--

FABRY. That\'s fine! Miss Glory, excuse me for five minutes.

DR. GALL. Pardon me, too, dear Miss Glory.

BUSMAN. I won\'t be long.

HALLEMEIER. We\'re all very glad you\'ve come.

BUSMAN. We\'ll be back in exactly five minutes. (*All rush out except*
DOMIN *and* HELENA.)

HELENA. What have they all gone off for?

DOMIN. To cook, Miss Glory.

HELENA. To cook what?

DOMIN Lunch. The Robots do our cooking for us and as they\'ve no taste
it\'s not altogether\-- Hallemeier is awfully good at grills, and Gall
can make a kind of sauce, and Busman knows all about omelets.

HELENA. What a feast! And what\'s the specialty of Mr.\--your builder?

DOMIN. Alquist? Nothing. He only lays the table. And Fabry will get
together a little fruit. Our cuisine is very modest, Miss Glory.

HELENA. I wanted to ask you something\--

DOMIN. And I wanted to ask you something, too. (*Looking at watch.*)
Five minutes

HELENA. What did you want to ask me?

DOMIN. Excuse me, you ask first.

HELENA. Perhaps it\'s silly of me, but why do you manufacture female
Robots when\-- when\--

DOMIN. When sex means nothing to them?

HELENA. Yes.

DOMIN. There\'s a certain demand for them, you see. Servants,
saleswomen, stenographers. People are used to it.

HELENA. But\-- but, tell me, are the Robots male and female mutually\--
completely without\--

DOMIN. Completely indifferent to each other, Miss Glory. There\'s no
sign of any affection between them.

HELENA. Oh, that\'s terrible.

DOMIN. Why?

HELENA. It\'s so unnatural. One doesn\'t know whether to be disgusted or
to hate them, or perhaps\--

DOMIN. To pity them?

HELENA. That\'s more like it. What did you want to ask me about?

DOMIN. I should like to ask you, Miss Helena, whether you will marry me?

HELENA. What?

DOMIN. Will you be my wife?

HELENA. No! The idea!

DOMIN (*looking at his watch*). Another three minutes. If you won\'t
marry me you\'ll have to marry one of the other five.

HELENA. But why should I?

DOMIN. Because they\'re all going to ask you in turn.

HELENA. How could they dare to do such a thing?

DOMIN. I\'m very sorry, Miss Glory. It seems they\'ve all fallen in love
with you.

HELENA. Please don\'t let them. I\'ll\-- I\'ll go away at once.

DOMIN. Helena, you wouldn\'t be so cruel as to refuse us.

HELENA. But, but\-- I can\'t marry all six.

DOMIN. No, but one anyhow. If you don\'t want me, marry Fabry.

HELENA. I won\'t.

DOMIN. Dr. Gall.

HELENA. I don\'t want any of you.

DOMIN (*again looking at his watch*). Another two minutes.

HELENA. I think you\'d marry any woman who came here.

DOMIN. Plenty of them have come, Helena.

HELENA. Young?

DOMIN. Yes.

HELENA. Why didn\'t you marry one of them?

DOMIN. Because I didn\'t lose my head. Until today. Then, as soon as you
lifted your veil\-- (HELENA *turns her head away*.) Another minute.

HELENA. But I don\'t want you, I tell you.

DOMIN (*laying both hands on her shoulders*). One more minute! Now you
either have to look me straight in the eye and say \"No,\" violently,
and then I\'ll leave you alone\-- or\-- (HELENA *looks at him.*)

HELENA (*turning away*). You\'re mad!

DOMIN. A man has to be a bit mad, Helena. That\'s the best thing about
him.

HELENA. You are\-- you are\--

DOMIN. Well?

HELENA. Don\'t, you\'re hurting me.

DOMIN. The last chance, Helena. Now, or never\--

HELENA. But\-- but, Harry\-- (*He embraces and kisses her. Knocking at
the door.*)

DOMIN (*releasing her*). Come in.

\[*Enter* BUSMAN, DR. GALL, *and* HALLEMEIER *in kitchen aprons.* FABRY
*with a bouquet and* ALQUIST *with a napkin over his arm.*\]

Have you finished your job?

BUSMAN. Yes.

DOMIN. So have we.


\[*For a moment the men stand nonplussed; but as soon as they realize
what DOMIN means they rush forward, congratulating* HELENA *and* DOMIN
*as the curtains falls.*\]

# Act II

## HELENA\'S DRAWING ROOM---TEN YEARS LATER. MORNING.


HELENA\'S *drawing room. On the left a baize door, and a door to the
music room, on the right a door to* HELENA\'S *bedroom. In the center
are windows looking out on the sea and the harbor. A table with odds and
ends, a sofa and chairs, a writing table with an electric lamp, on the
right a fireplace. On a small table back of the sofa, a small reading
lamp. The whole drawing room in all its details is of a modern and
purely feminine character. Ten years have elapsed since Act I.*

\[DOMIN, FABRY, HALLEMEIER *enter on tiptoe from the left, each carrying
a potted plant.*\]

HALLEMEIER (*putting down his flower and indicating the door to right*).
Still asleep? Well, as long as she\'s asleep she can\'t worry about it.

DOMIN. She knows nothing about it.

FABRY (*putting plant on writing desk*). I certainly hope nothing
happens today.

HALLEMEIER. For goodness\' sake drop it all. Look, Harry, this is a fine
cyclamen, isn\'t it? A new sort, my latest\-- Cyclamen Helena.

DOMIN (*looking out of the window*). No signs of the ship. Things must
be pretty bad.

HALLEMEIER. Be quiet. Suppose she heard you.

DOMIN. Well, anyway, the *Ultimus* arrived just in time.

FABRY. You really think that today\--?

DOMIN. I don\'t know. Aren\'t the flowers fine?

HALLEMEIER. These are my new primroses. And this is my new jasmine.
I\'ve discovered a wonderful way of developing flowers quickly. Splendid
varieties, too. Next year I\'ll be developing marvelous ones.

DOMIN. What\-- next year?

FABRY. I\'d give a good deal to know what\'s happening at Havre with\--

DOMIN. Keep quiet.

HELENA (*calling from right*). Nana!

DOMIN. She\'s awake. Out you go. (*All go out on tiptoe through upper
left door.*)

\[*Enter* NANA *from lower left door.*\]

NANA. Horrid mess! Pack of heathens. If I had my say I\'d\--

HELENA (*backward in the doorway*). Nana, come and do up my dress.

NANA. I\'m coming. So you\'re up at last. (*Fastening* HELENA\'S
*dress.*) My gracious, what brutes!

HELENA. Who?

NANA. If you want to turn around, then turn around, but I shan\'t fasten
you up.

HELENA. What are you grumbling about now?

NANA. These dreadful creatures, these heathen\--

HELENA. The Robots?

NANA. I wouldn\'t even call them by name.

HELENA. What\'s happened?

NANA. Another of them here has caught it. He began to smash up the
statues and pictures in the drawing room, gnashed his teeth, foamed at
the mouth\-- quite mad. Worse than an animal.

HELENA. Which of them caught it?

NANA. The one\-- well, he hasn\'t got any Christian name. The one in
charge of the library.

HELENA. Radius?

NANA. That\'s him. My goodness, I\'m scared of them. A spider doesn\'t
scare me as much as them.

HELENA. But, Nana, I\'m surprised you\'re not sorry for them.

NANA. Why, you\'re scared of them, too! You know you are. Why else did
you bring me here?

HELENA. I\'m not scared, really I\'m not, Nana. I\'m only sorry for
them.

NANA. You\'re scared. Nobody could help being scared. Why, the dog\'s
scared of them: he won\'t take a scrap of meat out of their hands. He
draws in his tail and howls when he knows they\'re about.

HELENA. The dog has no sense.

NANA. He\'s better than them, and he knows it. Even the horse shies when
he meets them. They don\'t have any young, and a dog has young, everyone
has young\--

HELENA. Please fasten up my dress, Nana.

NANA. I say it\'s against God\'s will to\--

HELENA. What is it that smells so nice?

NANA. Flowers.

HELENA. What for?

NANA. Now you can turn around.

HELENA. Oh, aren\'t they lovely! Look, Nana. What\'s happening today?

NANA. It ought to be the end of the world.

\[*Enter* DOMIN.\]

HELENA. Oh, hello, Harry. Harry, why all these flowers?

DOMIN. Guess.

HELENA. Well, it\'s not my birthday!

DOMIN. Better than that.

HELENA. I don\'t know. Tell me.

DOMIN. It\'s ten years ago today since you came here.

HELENA. Ten years? Today\-- Why\-- (*They embrace.*)

NANA. I\'m off. (*Exits lower door, left.*)

HELENA. Fancy you remembering!

DOMIN. I\'m really ashamed, Helena. I didn\'t.

HELENA. But you\--

DOMIN. They remembered.

HELENA. Who?

DOMIN. Busman, Hallemeier, all of them. Put your hand in my pocket.

HELENA. Pearls! A necklace. Harry, is that for me?

DOMIN. It\'s from Busman.

HELENA. But we can\'t accept it, can we?

DOMIN. Oh, yes, we can. Put your hand in the other pocket.

HELENA (*takes a revolver out of his pocket*). What\'s that?

DOMIN. Sorry. Not that. Try again.

HELENA. Oh, Harry, what do you carry a revolver for?

DOMIN. It got there by mistake.

HELENA. You never used to carry one.

DOMIN. No, you\'re right. There, that\'s the pocket.

HELENA. A cameo. Why, it\'s a Greek cameo!

DOMIN. Apparently. Anyhow, Fabry says it is.

HELENA. Fabry? Did Mr. Fabry give me this?

DOMIN. Of course. (*Opens the door at the left.*) And look in here.
Helena, come and see this.

HELENA. Oh, isn\'t it fine! Is this from you?

DOMIN. No, from Alquist. And there\'s another on the piano.

HELENA. This must be from you.

DOMIN. There\'s a card on it.

HELENA. From Dr. Gall. (*Reappearing in the doorway.*) Oh, Harry, I feel
embarrassed at so much kindness.

DOMIN. Come here. This is what Hallemeier brought you.

HELENA. These beautiful flowers?

DOMIN. Yes. It\'s a new kind. Cyclamen Helena. He grew them in honor of
you. They are almost as beautiful as you.

HELENA. Harry, why do they all\--

DOMIN. They\'re awfully fond of you. I\'m afraid that my present is a
little\-- Look out of the window.

HELENA. Where?

DOMIN. Into the harbor.

HELENA. There\'s a new ship.

DOMIN. That\'s your ship.

HELENA. Mine? How do you mean?

DOMIN For you to take trips in\-- for your amusement.

HELENA. Harry, that\'s a gunboat.

DOMIN. A gunboat? What are you thinking of? It\'s only a little bigger
and more solid than most ships.

HELENA. Yes, but with guns.

DOMIN. Oh, yes, with a few guns. You\'ll travel like a queen, Helena.

HELENA. What\'s the meaning of it? Has anything happened?

DOMIN. Good heavens, no. I say, try these pearls.

HELENA. Harry, have you had bad news?

DOMIN. On the contrary, no letters have arrived for a whole week.

HELENA. Nor telegrams?

DOMIN. Nor telegrams.

DOMIN. Holidays for us. We all sit in the office with our feet on the
table and take a nap. No letters, no telegrams. Oh, glorious.

HELENA. Then you\'ll stay with me today?

DOMIN. Certainly. That is, we will see. Do you remember ten years ago
today? \"Miss Glory, it\'s a great honor to welcome you.\"

HELENA. \"Oh, Mr. Manager, I\'m so interested in your factory.\"

DOMIN. \"I\'m sorry, Miss Glory, it\'s strictly forbidden. The
manufacture of artificial people is a secret.\"

HELENA. \"But to oblige a young lady who has come a long way.\"

DOMIN. \"Certainly, Miss Glory, we have no secrets from you.\"

HELENA (*seriously*). Are you sure, Harry?

DOMIN. Yes.

HELENA. \"But I warn you, sir; this young lady intends to do terrible
things.\"

DOMIN. \"Good gracious, Miss Glory. Perhaps she doesn\'t want to marry
me.\"

HELENA. \"Heaven forbid. She never dreamed of such a thing. But she came
here intending to stir up a revolt among your Robots.\"

DOMIN (*suddenly serious*). A revolt of the Robots!

HELENA. Harry, what\'s the matter with you?

DOMIN (*laughing it off*). \"A revolt of the Robots, that\'s a fine
idea, Miss Glory. It would be easier for you to cause bolts and screws
to rebel, than our Robots. You know, Helena, you\'re wonderful, you\'ve
turned the heads of us all.\" (*He sits on the arm of* HELENA\'s
*chair.*)

HELENA (*naturally*). Oh, I was fearfully impressed by you all then. You
were all so sure of yourselves, so strong. I seemed like a tiny little
girl who had lost her way among\-- among\--

DOMIN. Among what, Helena?

HELENA. Among huge trees. All my feelings were so trifling compared with
your self-confidence. And in all these years I\'ve never lost this
anxiety. But you\'ve never felt the least misgivings\-- not even when
everything went wrong.

DOMIN. What went wrong?

HELENA. Your plans. You remember, Harry, when the workingmen in America
revolted against the Robots and smashed them up, and when the people
gave the Robots firearms against the rebels. And then when the
governments turned the Robots into soldiers, and there were so many
wars.

DOMIN. (*getting up and walking about*). We foresaw that, Helena. You
see, those are only passing troubles, which are bound to happen before
the new conditions are established.

HELENA. You were all so powerful, so overwhelming. The whole world bowed
down before you. (*Standing up.*) Oh, Harry!

DOMIN. What is it?

HELENA. Close the factory and let\'s go away. All of us.

DOMIN. I say, what\'s the meaning of this?

HELENA. I don\'t know. But can\'t we go away?

DOMIN. Impossible, Helena. That is, at this particular moment\--

HELENA. At once, Harry. I\'m so frightened.

DOMIN. About what, Helena?

HELENA. It\'s as if something was falling on top of us, and couldn\'t be
stopped. Oh, take us all away from here. We\'ll find a place in the
world where there\'s no one else. Alquist will build us a house, and
then we\'ll begin life all over again. (*The telephone rings.*)

DOMIN. Excuse me. Hello\-- yes. What? I\'ll be there at once. Fabry is
calling me, dear.

HELENA. Tell me\--

DOMIN. Yes, when I come back. Don\'t go out of the house, dear.
(*Exits.*)

HELENA. He won\'t tell me\-- Nana, Nana, come at once.

NANA. Well, what is it now?

HELENA. Nana, find me the latest newspapers. Quickly. Look in Mr.
Domin\'s bedroom.

NANA. All right. He leaves them all over the place. That\'s how they get
crumpled up. (*Exits.*)

HELENA (*looking through a binocular at the harbor*). That\'s a warship.
U-l-t-i *Ultimus.* They\'re loading it.

NANA. Here they are. See how they\'re crumpled up. (*Enters.*)

HELENA. They\'re old ones. A week old. (NANA *sits in chair and reads
the newspapers.*) Something\'s happening, Nana.

NANA. Very likely. It always does. (*Spelling out the words.*) \"War in
the Balkans.\" Is that far off?

HELENA. Oh, don\'t read it. It\'s always the same. Always wars. NANA.
What else do you expect? Why do you keep selling thousands

and thousands of these heathens as soldiers?

HELENA. I suppose it can\'t be helped, Nana. We can\'t know\-- Domin
can\'t know what they\'re to be used for. When an order comes for them
he must just send them.

NANA. He shouldn\'t make them. (*Reading from newspaper.*) \"The Ro-bot
soldiers spare no-body in the occ-upied terr-it-ory. They have
ass-ass-ass-ass-in-at-ed ov-er sev-en hun-dred thou-sand cit-iz-ens.\"
Citizens, if you please.

HELENA. It can\'t be. Let me see. \"They have assassinated over seven
hundred thousand citizens, evidently at the order of their commander.
This act which runs counter to\--\"

NANA (*spelling out the words*). \"Re-bell-ion in Ma-drid a-gainst the
govern-ment. Rob-ot in-fant-ry fires on the crowd. Nine thou-sand killed
and wounded.\"

HELENA. Oh, stop.

NANA. Here\'s something printed in big letters: \"Latest news. At Havre
the first org-an-iz-ation of Rob-ots has been e-stab-lished. Rob-ot
work-men, cab-le and rail-way off-ic-ials, sail-ors and sold-iers have
iss-ued a man-i-fest-o to all Rob-ots through-out the world.\" I don\'t
understand that. That\'s got no sense. Oh, good gracious, another
murder!

HELENA. Take those papers away, Nana!

NANA. Wait a bit. Here\'s something in still bigger type. \"Stat-ist-ics
of pop-ul-at-lon.\" What\'s that?

HELENA. Let me see. (*Reads.*) \"During the past week there has again
not been a single birth recorded.\"

NANA. What\'s the meaning of that?

HELENA. Nana, no more people are being born.

NANA. That\'s the end, then. We\'re done for.

HELENA. Don\'t talk like that.

NANA. No more people are being born. That\'s a punishment, that\'s a
punishment.

HELENA. Nana!

NANA (*standing up*). That\'s the end of the world. (*She exits on the
left.*)

HELENA (*goes up to window*). Oh, Mr. Alquist, will you come up here.
Oh, come just as you are. You look very nice in your mason\'s overalls.

\[ALQUIST *enters from upper left entrance, his hand soiled with lime
and brick dust.*\]

Dear Mr. Alquist, it was awfully kind of you, that lovely present.

ALQUIST. My hands are all soiled. I\'ve been experimenting with that new
cement.

HELENA. Never mind. Please sit down. Mr. Aiquist, what\'s the meaning of
\"Ultimus\"?

ALQUIST. The last. Why?

HELENA. That\'s the name of my new ship. Have you seen it? Do you think
we\'re going off soon\-- on a trip?

ALQUIST. Perhaps very soon.

HELENA. All of you with me?

ALQUIST. I should like us all to be there.

HELENA. What is the matter?

ALQUIST. Things are just moving on.

HELENA. Dear Mr. Alquist, I know something dreadful has happened.

ALQUIST. Has your husband told you anything?

HELENA. No. Nobody will tell me anything. But I feel\-- Is anything the
matter?

ALQUIST. Not that we\'ve heard of yet.

HELENA. I feel so nervous. Don\'t you ever feel nervous?

ALQUIST. Well, I\'m an old man, you know. I\'ve got old-fashioned ways.
And I\'m afraid of all this progress, and these newfangled ideas.

HELENA. Like Nana?

ALQUIST. Yes, like Nana. Has Nana got a prayer book?

HELENA. Yes, a big thick one.

ALQUIST. And has it got prayers for various occasions? Against
thunderstorms? Against illness?

HELENA. Against temptations, against floods\--

ALQUIST. But not against progress?

HELENA. I don\'t think so.

ALQUIST. That\'s a pity.

HELENA. Why? Do you mean you\'d like to pray?

ALQUIST. I do pray.

HELENA. How?

ALQUIST. Something like this: \"Oh, Lord, I thank thee for having given
me toil. Enlighten Domin and all those who are astray; destroy their
work, and aid mankind to return to their labors; let them not suffer
harm in soul or body; deliver us from the Robots, and protect Helena,
Amen.\"

HELENA. Mr. Alquist, are you a believer?

ALQUIST. I don\'t know. I\'m not quite sure.

HELENA. And yet you pray?

ALQUIST. That\'s better than worrying about it.

HELENA. And that\'s enough for you?

ALQUIST. It *has* to be.

HELENA. But if you thought you saw the destruction of mankind coming
upon us\--

ALQUIST. I do see it.

HELENA. You mean mankind will be destroyed?

ALQUIST. It\'s sure to be unless\-- unless\...

HELENA. What?

ALQUIST. Nothing, good-bye. (*He hurries from the room.*)

HELENA. Nana, Nana!


\[NANA *entering from the left.*\]


Is Radius still there?

NANA. The one who went mad? They haven\'t come for him yet.

HELENA. Is he still raving?

NANA. No. He\'s tied up.

HELENA. Please bring him here. Nana. (*Exit NANA.*) (*Goes to
telephone.*) Hello, Dr. Gall, please. Oh, good day, Doctor. Yes, it\'s
Helena. Thanks for your lovely present. Could you come and see me right
away? It\'s important. Thank you.


\[NANA *brings in* RADIUS.\]


Poor Radius, you\'ve caught it too? Now they\'ll send you to the
stamping mill. Couldn\'t you control yourself? Why did it happen? You
see, Radius, you are more intelligent than the rest. Dr. Gall took such
trouble to make you different. Won\'t you speak?

RADIUS. Send me to the stamping mill.

HELENA. But I don\'t want them to kill you. What was the trouble,Radius?

RADIUS. I won\'t work for you. Put me into the stamping mill. HELENA. Do
you hate us? Why?

RADIUS. You are not as strong as the Robots. The Robots can do
everything. You only give orders. You do nothing but talk.

HELENA. But someone must give orders.

RADIUS. I don\'t want any master. I know everything for myself.

HELENA. Radius, Dr. Gall gave you a better brain than the rest, better
than ours. You are the only one of the Robots that understands
perfectly. That\'s why I had you put into the library, so that you could
read everything, understand everything, and then\-- oh, Radius, I wanted
you to show the whole world that the Robots are our equals. That\'s what
I want of you.

RADIUS. I don\'t want a master. I want to be master. I want to be master
over others.

HELENA. I\'m sure they\'d put you in charge of many Robots, Radius. You
would be a teacher of the Robots.

RADIUS. I want to be master over people.

HELENA (*staggering*) You are mad.

RADIUS. Then send me to the stamping mill.

HELENA. Do you think we\'re afraid of you?

RADIUS. What are you going to do? What are you going to do?

HELENA. Radius, give this note to Mr. Domin. It asks them not to send
you to the stamping mill. I\'m sorry you hate us so.

\[DR GALL *enters the room.*\]

DR. GALL. You wanted me?

HELENA. It\'s about Radius, Doctor. He had an attack this morning. He
smashed the statues downstairs.

DR. GALL. What a pity to lose him.

HELENA. Radius isn\'t going to be put in the stamping mill.

DR. GALL. But every Robot after he has an attack\-- it\'s a strict
order.

HELENA. No matter\-- Radius isn\'t going if I can prevent it.

DR. GALL. I warn you. It\'s dangerous. Come here to the window, my good
fellow. Let\'s have a look. Please give me a needle or a pin.

DR GALL. A test. (*Sticks it into the hand of* RADIUS, *who gives a
violent start.*) Gently, gently. (*Opens the jacket of* RADIUS, *and
puts his ear to his heart.*) Radius, you are going into the stamping
mill, do you understand? There they\'ll kill you, and grind you to
powder. That\'s terribly painful; it will make you scream aloud.

HELENA. Oh, Doctor\--

DR. GALL. No, no, Radius, I was wrong. I forgot that Madame Domin

has put in a good word for you, and you\'ll be let off. Do you
understand? Ah! That makes a difference, doesn\'t it? All right. You can
go.

RADIUS. You do unnecessary things. (RADIUS *returns to the library.*)

DR. GALL. Reaction of the pupils; increase of sensitiveness. It wasn\'t
an attack characteristic of the Robots.

HELENA What was it, then?

DR. GALL. Heaven knows. Stubbornness, anger, or revolt\-- I don\'t know.
And his heart, too!

HELENA. What?

DR. GALL. It was fluttering with nervousness like a human heart. He was
all in a sweat with fear, and\-- do you know, I don\'t believe the
rascal is a Robot at all any longer.

HELENA. Doctor, has Radius a soul?

DR. GALL. He\'s got something nasty.

HELENA. If you knew how he hates us! Oh, Doctor, are all your Robots
like that? All the new ones that you began to make in a different way?

DR. GALL. Well, some are more sensitive than others. They\'re all more
like human beings than Rossum\'s Robots were.

HELENA. Perhaps this hatred is more than like human beings, too?

DR. GALL. That, too, is progress.

HELENA. What became of the girl you made, the one who was most like us?

DR. GALL. Your favorite? I kept her. She\'s lovely, but stupid. No good
for work.

HELENA. But she\'s so beautiful.

DR. GALL. I called her Helena. I wanted her to resemble you. But she\'s
a failure.

HELENA. In what way?

DR. GALL. She goes about as if in a dream, remote and listless. She\'s
without life. I watch and wait for a miracle to happen. Sometimes I
think to myself, \"If you were to wake up only for a moment you will
kill me for having made you.\"

HELENA. And yet you go on making Robots! Why are no more children being
born?

DR GALL We don\'t know.

HELENA. Oh, but you must. Tell me.

DR. GALL. You see, so many Robots are being manufactured that people are
becoming superfluous; man is really a survival. But that he should begin
to die out, after a paltry thirty years of competition! That\'s the
awful part of it. You might think that nature was offended at the
manufacture of the Robots. All the universities are sending in long
petitions to restrict their production. Otherwise, they say, mankind
will become extinct through lack of fertility. But the R. U. R.
shareholders, of course, won\'t hear of it. All the governments, on the
other hand, are clamoring for an increase in production, to raise the
standards of their armies. And all the manufacturers in the world are
ordering Robots like mad.

HELENA. And has no one demanded that the manufacture should cease
altogether?

DR. GALL. No one has the courage.

HELENA. Courage!

DR. GALL. People would stone him to death. You see, after all, it\'s
more convenient to get your work done by the Robots.

HELENA. Oh, Doctor, what\'s going to become of people?

DR. GALL. God knows, Madame Helena, it looks to us scientists like the
end!

HELENA (*rising*). Thank you for coming and telling me.

DR. GALL. That means you\'re sending me away?

HELENA. Yes. (Exit DR. GALL.)

HELENA (*with sudden resolution*). Nana, Nana! The fire, light it
quickly. (HELENA rushes into DOMIN\'S room.)

NANA (*entering from left.*) What, light the fire in summer? Has that
mad Radius gone? A fire in summer, what an idea! Nobody would think
she\'d been married for ten years. She\'s like a baby, no sense at all.
A fire in summer! Like a baby.

HELENA (*returns from right, with armful of faded papers*). Is it
burning, Nana? All this has got to be burned.

NANA. What\'s that?

HELENA. Old papers, fearfully old. Nana, shall I burn them?

NANA. Are they any use?

HELENA. No.

NANA. Well, then, burn them.

HELENA (*throwing the first sheet on the fire*). What would you say,
Nana, if this was money, a lot of money?

NANA. I\'d say burn it. A lot of money is a bad thing.

HELENA. And if it was an invention, the greatest invention in the world?

NANA. I\'d say burn it. All these newfangled things are an offense to
the Lord. It\'s downright wickedness. Wanting to improve the world after
He has made it.

HELENA Look how they curl up! As if they were alive. Oh, Nana, how
horrible!

NANA. Here, let me burn them.

HELENA. No, no, I must do it myself. Just look at the flames. They are
like hands, like tongues, like living shapes. (*Raking fire with the
poker.*) Lie down, lie down.

NANA. That\'s the end of them.

HELENA (*standing up horror-stricken*). Nana, Nana!

NANA. Good gracious, what is it you\'ve burned?

HELENA. Whatever have I done?

NANA. Well, what was it? (*Men\'s laughter off left.*)

HELENA. Go quickly. It\'s the gentlemen coming.

NANA. Good gracious, what a place! (*Exits.*)

DOMIN (*opens the door at left*). Come along and offer your
congratulations.

\[*Enter* HALLEMEIER *and* GALL.\]

HALLEMEIER. Madame Helena, I congratulate you on this festive day.

HELENA. Thank you. Where are Fabry and Busman?

DOMIN. They\'ve gone down to the harbor.

HALLEMEIER. Friends we must drink to this happy occasion.

HELENA. Brandy?

DR. GALL. Vitriol, if you like.

HELENA. With soda water? (*Exits.*)

HALLEMEIER. Let\'s be temperate. No soda.

DOMIN. What\'s been burning here? Well, shall I tell her about it?

DR. GALL. Of course. It\'s all over now.

HALLEMEIER (*embracing* DOMIN *and* DR.GALL). It\'s all over now; it\'s
all over now.

DR. GALL. It\'s all over now.

DOMIN. It\'s all over now.

HELENA. (*entering from left with decanter and glasses*). What\'s all
over now\'? What\'s the matter with you all?

HALLEMEIER. A piece of good luck, Madame Domin. Just ten years ago today
you arrived on this island.

DR. GALL. And now, ten years later to the minute\--

HALLEMEIER. \--the same ship\'s returning to us. So here\'s to luck.
That\'s fine and strong.

DR. GALL. Madame, your health.

HELENA. Which ship do you mean?

DOMIN. Any ship will do, as long as it arrives in time. To the ship,
boys. (*Empties his glass.*)

HELENA. You\'ve been waiting for a ship?

HALLEMEIER. Rather. Like Robinson Crusoe. Madame Helena, best wishes.
Come along, Domin, out with the news.

HELENA. Do tell me what\'s happened.

DOMIN. First, it\'s all up.

HELENA. What\'s up?

DOMIN. The revolt.

HELENA. What revolt?

DOMIN. Give me the paper, Hallemeier. (*Reads.*) \"The first national
Robot organization has been founded at Havre, and has issued an appeal
to the Robots throughout the world.\"

HELENA. I read that.

DOMIN. That means a revolution. A revolution of all the Robots in the
world.

HALLEMEIER. By Jove, I\'d like to know\--

DOMIN. \--who started it? So would I. There was nobody in the world who
could affect the Robots; no agitator, no one, and suddenly\-- this
happens, if you please.

HELENA. What did they do?

DOMIN. They got possession of all firearms, telegraphs, radio stations,
railways, and ships.

HALLEMEIER. And don\'t forget that these rascals outnumbered us by at
least a thousand to one. A hundredth part of them would be enough to
settle us.

DOMIN. Remember that this news was brought by the last steamer. That
explains the stoppage of all communication, and the arrival of no more
ships. We knocked off work a few days ago, and we\'re just waiting to
see when things are to start afresh.

HELENA. Is that why you gave me a warship?

DOMIN. Oh, no, my dear, I ordered that six months ago, just to be on the
safe side. But upon my soul, I was sure then that we\'d be on board
today.

HELENA. Why six months ago?

DOMIN. Well, there were signs, you know. But that\'s of no consequence.
To think that this week the whole of civilization has been at stake.
Your health, boys.

HALLEMEIER. Your health, Madame Helena.

HELENA. You say it\'s all over?

DOMIN. Absolutely.

HELENA. How do you know?

DR. GALL. The boat\'s coming in. The regular mailboat, exact to the
minute by the timetable. It will dock punctually at eleven-thirty.

DOMIN. Punctuality is a fine thing, boys. That\'s what keeps the world
in order. Here\'s to punctuality.

HELENA. Then\-- everything\'s\-- all right?

DOMIN. Practically everything. I believe they\'ve cut the cables and
seized the radio stations. But it doesn\'t matter if only the timetable
holds good.

HALLEMEIER. If the timetable holds good, human laws hold good; the laws
of the universe hold good; everything holds good that ought to hold
good. The timetable is more significant than the gospel; more than
Homer, more than the whole of Kant. The timetable is the most perfect
product of the human mind. Madame Domin, I\'ll fill up my glass.

HELENA. Why didn\'t you tell me anything about it?

DR. GALL. Heaven forbid.

DOMIN. You mustn\'t be worried with such things.

HELENA. But if the revolution had spread as far as here?

DOMIN. You wouldn\'t know anything about it.

HELENA. Why?

DOMIN. Because we\'d be on board your *Ultimus* and well out at sea.
Within a month, Helena, we\'d be dictating our own terms to the Robots.

HELENA. I don\'t understand.

DOMIN. We\'d take something away with us that the Robots could not exist
without.

HELENA. What, Harry?

DOMIN. The secret of their manufacture. Old Rossum\'s manuscript. As
soon as they found out that they couldn\'t make themselves they\'d be on
their knees to us.

HELENA. Why didn\'t you tell me?

DR. GALL. Why, the boat\'s in!

HALLEMEIER. Eleven-thirty to the dot. The good old *Amelia* that brought
Madame Helena to us.

DR. GALL. Just ten years ago to the minute.

HALLEMEIER. They\'re throwing out the mailbags.

DOMIN. Busman\'s waiting for them. Fabry will bring us the first news.
You know, Helena, I\'m fearfully curious to know how they tackled this
business in Europe.

HALLEMEIER. To think we weren\'t in it, we who invented the Robots!

HELENA. Harry!

DOMIN. What is it?

HELENA. Let\'s leave here.

DOMIN. Now, Helena? Oh, come, come!

HELENA. As quickly as possible, all of us!

DOMIN. Why?

HELENA. Please, Harry, please, Dr. Gall; Hallemeier, please close the
factory.

DOMIN. Why, none of us could leave here now.

HELENA. Why?

DOMIN. Because we\'re about to extend the manufacture of the Robots.

HELENA. What\-- now\-- now after the revolt?

DOMIN Yes, precisely, after the revolt. We\'re just beginning the
manufacture of a new kind.

HELENA. What kind?

DOMIN. Henceforward we shan\'t have just one factory. There won\'t be
Universal Robots any more. We\'ll establish a factory in every country,
in every State; and do you know what these new factories will make?

HELENA. No, what?

DOMIN. National Robots.

HELENA. How do you mean?

DOMIN. I mean that each of these factories will produce Robots of a
different color, a different language. They\'ll be complete strangers to
each other. They\'ll never be able to understand each other. Then we\'ll
egg them on a little in the matter of misunderstanding, and the result
will be that for ages to come every Robot will hate every other Robot of
a different factory mark.

HALLEMEIER. By Jove, we\'ll make Negro Robots and Swedish Robots and
Italian Robots and Chinese Robots and Czechoslovakian Robots, and
then\--

HELENA. Harry, that\'s dreadful.

HALLEMEIER. Madame Domin, here\'s to the hundred new factories, the
National Robots.

DOMIN. Helena, mankind can keep things going only for another hundred
years at the outside. For a hundred years men must be allowed to develop
and achieve the most they can.

HELENA. Oh, close the factory before it\'s too late.

DOMIN. I tell you we are just beginning on a bigger scale than ever.

\[*Enter* FABRY.\]

DR. GALL. Well, Fabry?

DOMIN. What\'s happened? Have you been down to the boat?

FABRY. Read that, Domin! (FABRY *hands* DOMIN *a small handbill.*)

DR. GALL. Let\'s hear!

HALLEMEIER. Tell us, Fabry.

FABRY. Well, everything is all right\-- comparatively. On the whole,
much as we expected.

DR. GALL. They acquitted themselves splendidly.

FABRY. Who?

DR. GALL. The people.

FABRY. Oh, yes, of course. That is\-- excuse me, there is something we
ought to discuss alone.

HELENA. Oh, Fabry, have you had bad news? (DOMIN *makes a sign to*
FABRY.)

FABRY. No, no on the contrary. I only think that we had better go into
the office.

HELENA. Stay here. I\'ll go. (*She goes into the library.*)

DR. GALL. What\'s happened?

DOMIN. Damnation!

FABRY. Bear in mind that the *Amelia* brought whole bales of these
leaflets. No other cargo at all.

HALLEMEIER. What? But it arrived on the minute.

FABRY. The Robots are great on punctuality. Read it, Domin.

DOMIN (*reads handbill*). \"Robots throughout the world: We, the first
international organization of Rossum\'s Universal Robots, proclaim man
as our enemy, and an outlaw in the universe.\" Good heavens, who taught
them these phrases?

DR. GALL. Go on.

DOMIN. They say they are more highly developed than man, stronger and
more intelligent. That man\'s their parasite. Why, it\'s absurd!

FABRY. Read the third paragraph.

DOMIN. \"Robots throughout the world, we command you to kill all
mankind. Spare no men. Spare no women. Save factories, railways,
machinery, mines, and raw materials. Destroy the rest. Then return to
work. Work must not be stopped.\"

DR GALL. That\'s ghastly!

HALLEMEIER. The devil!

DOMIN. \"These orders are to be carried out as soon as received.\" Then
come detailed instructions. Is this actually being done, Fabry?

FABRY. Evidently.

\[BUSMAN *rushes in.*\]

BUSMAN. Well, boys, I suppose you\'ve heard the glad news.

DOMIN. Quick\-- on board the *Ultimus*.

BUSMAN. Wait, Harry, wait. There\'s no hurry. My word, that was a
sprint!

DOMIN. Why wait?

BUSMAN. Because it\'s no good, my boy. The Robots are already on board
the *Ultimus*.

DR. GALL. That\'s ugly.

DOMIN. Fabry, telephone the electrical works.

BUSMAN. Fabry, my boy, don\'t. The wire has been cut.

DOMIN (*inspecting his revolver*). Well, then, I\'ll go.

BUSMAN. Where?

DOMIN. To the electrical works. There are some people still there. I\'ll
bring them across.

BUSMAN. Better not try it.

DOMIN. Why?

BUSMAN. Because I\'m very much afraid we are surrounded.

DR. GALL. Surrounded? (*Runs to window.*) I rather think you\'re right.

HALLEMEIER. By Jove, that\'s deuced quick work.

\[HELENA *runs in from the library.*\]

HELENA. Harry, what\'s this?

DOMIN. Where did you get it?

HELENA (*points to the manifesto of the Robots, which she has in her
hand*). The Robots in the kitchen!

DOMIN. Where are the ones that brought it?

HELENA. They\'re gathered round the house. (*The factory whistle
blows.*)

BUSMAN. Noon?

DOMIN (*looking at his watch*). That\'s not noon yet. That must be\--
that\'s\--

HELENA. What?

DOMIN. The Robots\' signal! The attack!

\[GALL, HALLEMEIER, *and* FABRY *close and fasten the iron shutters
outside the windows, darkening the room. The whistle is still blowing as
the curtain falls.*\]

# Act III

## THE SAME AFTERNOON

HELENA\'S *drawing room as before.* DOMIN *comes into the room.* DR.

GALL *is looking out of the window, through closed shutters.* ALQUIST
*is seated down right.*

DOMIN. Any more of them?

DR. GALL. Yes. There standing like a wall, beyond the garden railing.
Why are they so quiet? It\'s monstrous to be besieged with silence.

DOMIN. I should like to know what they are waiting for. They must make a
start any minute now. If they lean against the railing they\'ll snap it
like a match.

DR. GALL. They aren\'t armed.

DOMIN. We couldn\'t hold our own for five minutes. Man alive, they\'d
overwhelm us like an avalanche. Why don\'t they make a rush for it? I
say\--

DR. GALL. Well?

DOMIN. I\'d like to know what would become of us in the next ten
minutes. They\'ve got us in a vise. We\'re done for, Gall. (*Pause.*)

DR. GALL. You know, we made one serious mistake.

DOMIN. What?

DR. GALL. We made the Robots\' faces too much alike. A hundred thousand
faces all alike, all facing this way. A hundred thousand expressionless
bubbles. It\'s like a nightmare.

DOMIN. You think if they\'d been different\--

DR. GALL. It wouldn\'t have been such an awful sight!

DOMIN (*looking through a telescope toward the harbor*). I\'d like to
know what they unloading from the *Amelia*.

DR. GALL. Not firearms.

\[FABRY *and* HALLEMEIER *rush into the room carrying electric
cables.*\]

FABRY. All right, Hallemeier, lay down that wire.

HALLEMEIER. That was a bit of work. What\'s the news?

DR. GALL. We\'re completely surrounded.

HALLEMEIER. We\'ve barricaded the passage and the stairs. Any water
here? (*Drinks.*) God, what swarms of them! I don\'t like the looks of
them, Domin. There\'s a feeling of death about it all.

FABRY. Ready!

DR. GALL. What\'s that wire for, Fabry?

FABRY. The electrical installation. Now we can run the current all along
the garden railing whenever we like. If any one touches it he\'ll know
it. We\'ve still got some people there anyhow.

DR. GALL. Where?

FABRY. In the electrical works. At least I hope so. (*Goes to lamp on
table behind sofa and turns on lamp.*) Ah, they\'re there, and they\'re
working. (*Puts out lamp.*) So long as that\'ll burn we\'re all right.

HALLEMEIER. The barricades are all right, too, Fabry.

FABRY Your barricades! I can put twelve hundred volts into that railing.

DOMIN. Where\'s Busman?

FABRY Downstairs in the office. He\'s working out some calculations.
I\'ve called him. We must have a conference.

\[HELENA *is heard playing the piano in the library.* HALLEMEIER *goes
to the door and stands, listening.*\]

ALQUIST. Thank God, Madame Helena can still play.

\[BUSMAN *enters, carrying the ledgers.*\]

FABRY. Look out, Bus, look out for the wires.

DR. GALL. What\'s that you\'re carrying?

BUSMAN (*going to table*). The ledgers, my boy! I\'d like to wind up the
accounts before\-- before\-- well, this time I shan\'t wait till the new
year to strike a balance. What\'s up? (*Goes to the window.*) Absolutely
quiet.

DR. GALL. Can\'t you see anything?

BUSMAN. Nothing but blue\-- blue everywhere.

DR. GALL. That\'s the Robots. (BUSMAN *sits down at the table and opens
the ledgers.*)

DOMIN. The Robots are unloading firearms from the *Amelia*.

BUSMAN. Well, what of it? How can I stop them?

DOMIN. We can\'t stop them.

BUSMAN. Then let me go on with my accounts. (*Goes on with his work.*)

DOMIN (*picking up telescope and looking into the harbor*). Good God,
the *Ultimus* has trained her guns on us!

DR. GALL. Who\'s done *that*?

DOMIN. The Robots on board.

FABRY. H\'m, then, of course, then\-- then, that\'s the end of us.

DR. GALL. You mean?

FABRY. The Robots are practiced marksmen.

DOMIN. Yes. It\'s inevitable. (*Pause.*)

DR. GALL. It was criminal of old Europe to teach the Robots to fight.
Damn them! Couldn\'t they have given us a rest with their politics? It
was a crime to make soldiers of them.

ALQUIST. It was a crime to make Robots.

DOMIN. What?

ALQUIST. It was a crime to make Robots.

DOMIN. No, Alquist, I don\'t regret that even today.

ALQUIST. Not even today?

DOMIN. Not even today, the last day of civilization. It was a colossal
achievement.

BUSMAN (*sotto voce*). Three hundred sixty million.

DOMIN. Alquist, this is our last hour. We are already speaking half in
the other world. It was not an evil dream to shatter the servitude of
labor\-- the dreadful and humiliating labor that man had to undergo.
Work was too hard. Life was too hard. And to overcome that\--

ALQUIST. Was not what the two Rossums dreamed of. Old Rossum only

thought of his Godless tricks and the young one of his millions. And
that\'s not what your R.U.R. shareholders dream of either. They dream of
dividends, and their dividends are the ruin of mankind.

DOMIN. To hell with your dividends! Do you suppose I\'d have done an
hour\'s work for them? It was for myself that I worked, for my own
satisfaction. I wanted man to become the master, so that he shouldn\'t
live merely for a crust of bread. I wanted not a single soul to be
broken by other people\'s machinery. I wanted nothing, nothing, nothing
to be left of this appalling social structure. I\'m revolted by poverty.
I wanted a new generation. I wanted\-- I thought\--

ALQUIST. Well?

DOMIN. I wanted to turn the whole of mankind into an aristocracy of the
world. An aristocracy nourished by millions of mechanical slaves.
Unrestricted, free, and consummated in man. And maybe more than man.

ALQUIST. Superman?

DOMIN. Yes. Oh, only to have a hundred years of time! Another hundred
years for the future of mankind.

BUSMAN (*sotto voce*). Carried forward, four hundred and twenty
millions. (*The music stops.*)

HALLEMEIER. What a fine thing music is! We ought to have gone in for
that before.

FABRY. Gone in for what?

HALLEMEIER. Beauty, lovely things. What a lot of lovely things there
are! The world was wonderful and we\-- we here\-- tell me, what
enjoyment did we have?

BUSMAN (*sotto voce*). Five hundred and twenty millions.

HALLEMEIER (*at the window*). Life was a big thing. Life was\-- Fabry,
switch the current into that railing.

FABRY. Why?

HALLEMEIER. They\'re grabbing hold of it.

DR. GALL. Connect it up.

HALLEMEIER. Fine! That\'s doubled them up! Two, three, four killed.

DR. GALL. They\'re retreating!

HALLEMEIER. Five killed!

DR. GALL. The first encounter!

HALLEMEIER. They\'re charred to cinders, my boy. Who says we must give
up?

DOMIN (*wiping his forehead*). Perhaps we\'ve been killed these hundred
years and are only ghosts. It\'s as if I had been through all this
before; as if I\'d already had a mortal wound here in the throat. And
you, Fabry, had once been shot in the head. And you, Gall, torn limb
from limb. And Hallemeier knifed.

HALLEMEIER. Fancy me being knifed. (*Pause.*) Why are you so quiet, you
fools. Speak, can\'t you?

ALQUIST. And who is to blame for all this?

HALLEMEIER. Nobody is to blame except the Robots.

ALQUIST. No, it is we who are to blame. You, Domin, myself, all of us.
For our own selfish ends, for profit, for progress, we have destroyed
mankind. Now we\'ll burst with all our greatness.

HALLEMEIER. Rubbish, man. Mankind can\'t be wiped out so easily.

ALQUIST. It\'s our fault. It\'s our fault.

DR. GALL. No! I\'m to blame for this, for everything that\'s happened.

FABRY. You, Gall?

DR. GALL. I changed the Robots.

BUSMAN. What\'s that?

DR. GALL. I changed the character of the Robots. I changed the way of
making them. Just a few details about their bodies. Chiefly\-- chiefly,
their\-- their irritability.

HALLEMEIER. Damn it, why?

BUSMAN. What did you do it for?

FABRY. Why didn\'t you say anything?

DR. GALL. I did it in secret. I was transforming them into human beings.
In certain respects they\'re already above us. They\'re stronger than we
are.

FABRY. And what\'s that got to do with the revolt of the Robots?

DR. GALL. Everything, in my opinion. They\'ve ceased to be machines.
They\'re already aware of their superiority, and they hate us. They hate
all that is human.

DOMIN. Perhaps we\'re only phantoms!

FABRY. Stop, Harry. We haven\'t much time! Dr. Gall!

DOMIN. Fabry, Fabry, how your forehead bleeds, where the shot pierced
it!

FABRY. Be silent! Dr. Gall, you admit changing the way of making the
Robots?

DR. GALL. Yes.

FABRY. Were you aware of what might be the consequences of your
experiment?

DR. GALL. I was bound to reckon with such a possibility.

\[HELENA *enters the drawing room from left.*\]

FABRY. Why did you do it, then?

DR. GALL. For my own satisfaction. The experiment was my own.

HELENA. That\'s not true, Dr. Gall!

DOMIN. Helena, you? Let\'s look at you. Oh, it\'s terrible to be dead.

HELENA. Stop, Harry.

DOMIN. No, no, embrace me. Helena don\'t leave me now. You are life
itself.

HELENA. No, dear, I won\'t leave you. But I must tell them. Dr. Gall is
not guilty.

DOMIN. Excuse me, Gall was under certain obligations.

HELENA. No, Harry. He did it because I wanted it. Tell them, Gall, how
many years ago did I ask you to\--?

DR. GALL. I did it on my own responsibility.

HELENA. Don\'t believe him, Harry. I asked him to give the Robots souls.

DOMIN. This has nothing to do with the soul.

HELENA. That\'s what he said. He said that he could change only a
physiological\-- a physiological\--

HALLEMEIER A physiological correlate?

HELENA. Yes. But it meant so much to me that he should do even that.

DOMIN. Why?

HELENA. I thought that if they were more like us they would understand
us better. That they couldn\'t hate us if they were only a little

more human.

DOMIN. Nobody can hate man more than man.

HELENA. Oh, don\'t speak like that, Harry. It was so terrible, this
cruel strangeness between us and them. That\'s why I asked Gall to
change the Robots. I swear to you that he didn\'t want to.

DOMIN. But he did it.

HELENA. Because I asked him.

DR. GALL. I did it for myself as an experiment.

HELENA. No, Dr. Gall! I knew you wouldn\'t refuse me.

DOMIN. Why?

HELENA. You know, Harry.

DOMIN. Yes, because he\'s in love with you\-- like all of them.
(*Pause.*)

HALLEMEIER. Good God! They\'re sprouting up out of the earth! Why,
perhaps these very walls will change into Robots.

BUSMAN. Gall, when did you actually start these tricks of yours?

DR. GALL. Three years ago.

BUSMAN. Aha! That means for every million of the good old Robots
there\'s only one of Gall\'s improved pattern.

DOMIN. What of it?

BUSMAN. That it\'s practically of no consequence whatever.

FABRY. Busman\'s right!

BUSMAN. I should think so, my boy! But do you know what is to blame for
all this lovely mess?

FABRY. What?

BUSMAN. The number. Upon my soul we might have known that some day or
other the Robots would be stronger than human beings, and that this was
bound to happen, and we were doing all we could to bring it about as
soon as possible. You, Domin, you, Fabry, myself\--

DOMIN. Are your accusing us?

BUSMAN. Oh, do you suppose the management controls the output? It\'s the
demand that controls the output.

HELENA. And is it for that we must perish?

BUSMAN. That\'s a nasty word, Madame Helena. We don\'t want to perish. I
don\'t, anyhow.

DOMIN. No. What do you want to do?

BUSMAN. I want to get out of this, that\'s all.

DOMIN. Oh, stop it, Busman.

BUSMAN. Seriously, Harry, I think we might try it.

DOMIN. How?

BUSMAN. By fair means. I do everything by fair means. Give me a free
hand and I\'ll negotiate with the Robots.

DOMIN. By fair means?

BUSMAN. Of course. For instance, I\'ll say to them: \"Worthy and
worshipful Robots, you have everything! You have intellect, you have
power, you have firearms. But we have just one interesting screed, a
dirty old yellow scrap of paper\--

DOMIN. Rossum\'s manuscript?

BUSMAN. Yes. \"And that,\" I\'ll tell them, \"contains an account of
your illustrious origin, the noble process of your manufacture,\" and so
on. \"Worthy Robots, without this scribble on that paper you will not be
able to produce a single new colleague. In another twenty years there
will not be one living specimen of a Robot that you could exhibit in a
menagerie. My esteemed friends, that would be a great blow to you, but
if you will let all of us human beings on Rossum\'s Island go on board
that ship we will deliver the factory and the secret of the process to
you in return. You allow us to get away and we allow you to manufacture
yourselves. Worthy Robots, that is a fair deal. Something for
something.\" That\'s what I\'d say to them, my boys.

DOMIN. Busman, do you think we\'d sell the manuscript?

BUSMAN. Yes, I do. If not in a friendly way, then\-- Either we sell it
or they\'ll find it. Just as you like.

DOMIN. Busman, we can destroy Rossum\'s manuscript.

BUSMAN. Then we destroy everything\... not only the manuscript but
ourselves. Do as you think fit.

DOMIN. There are over thirty of us on this island. Are we to sell the
secret and save that many human souls, at the risk of enslaving mankind?

BUSMAN. Why, you\'re mad! Who\'d sell the whole manuscript?

DOMIN. Busman, no cheating!

BUSMAN. Well then, sell; but afterward\--

DOMIN. Well?

BUSMAN. Let\'s suppose this happens: When we\'re on board the *Ultimus*
I\'ll stop up my ears with cotton wool, lie down somewhere in the hold,
and you\'ll train the guns on the factory, and blow it to smithereens,
and with it Rossum\'s secret.

FABRY. No!

DOMIN. Busman, you\'re no gentleman. If we sell, then it will be a
straight sale.

BUSMAN. It\'s in the interest of humanity to\--

DOMIN. It\'s in the interest of humanity to keep our word.

HALLEMEIER. Oh, come, what rubbish!

DOMIN. This is a fearful decision. We\'re selling the destiny of
mankind. Are we to sell or destroy? Fabry?

FABRY. Sell.

DOMIN. Gall?

DR. GAIL. Sell.

DOMIN. Hallemeier?

HALLEMEIER. Sell, of course!

DOMIN. Alquist?

ALQUIST. As God wills.

DOMIN. Very well. It shall be as you wish, gentlemen.

HELENA. Harry, you\'re not asking me.

DOMIN. No, child. Don\'t you worry about it.

FABRY. Who\'ll do the negotiating?

BUSMAN. I will.

DOMIN. Wait till I bring the manuscript. (*He goes into room at right.*)

HELENA. Harry, don\'t go! (*Pause,* HELENA *sinks into a chair.*)

FABRY (*looking out of window*). Oh, to escape you, you matter in
revolt; oh, to preserve human life, if only upon a single vessel\--

DR. GALL. Don\'t be afraid, Madame Helena. We\'ll sail far away from
here; we\'ll begin life all over again\--

HELENA. Oh, Gall, don\'t speak.

FABRY. It isn\'t too late. It will be a little State with one ship.
Alquist will build us a house and you shall rule over us.

HALLEMEIER. Madame Helena, Fabry\'s right.

HELENA (*breaking down*). Oh, stop! Stop!

BUSMAN. Good! I don\'t mind beginning all over again. That suits me
right down to the ground.

FABRY. And this little State of ours could be the center of future life.
A place of refuge where we could gather strength. Why, in a few hundred
years we could conquer the world again.

ALQUIST. You believe that even today?

FABRY. Yes, even today!

BUSMAN. Amen. You see, Madame Helena, we\'re not so badly off.

\[DOMIN *storms into the room.*\]

DOMIN. (*hoarsely*). Where\'s old Rossum\'s manuscript?

BUSMAN. In your strongbox, of course.

DOMIN. Someone\-- has\-- stolen it!

DR. GALL. Impossible.

DOMIN. Who has stolen it?

HELENA (*standing up*). I did.

DOMIN. Where did you put it?

HELENA. Harry, I\'ll tell you everything. Only forgive me.

DOMIN. Where did you put it?

HELENA. This morning\-- I burned\-- the two copies.

DOMIN. Burned them? Where? In the fireplace?

HELENA (*throwing herself on her knees*). For heaven\'s sake, Harry.

DOMIN (*going to fireplace*). Nothing, nothing but ashes. Wait, what\'s
this? (*Picks out a charred piece of paper and reads.*) \"By adding\--\"

DR. GALL. Let\'s see. \"By adding biogen to\--\" That\'s all.

DOMIN. Is that part of it?

DR. GALL. Yes.

BUSMAN. God in heaven!

DOMIN. Then we\'re done for. Get up, Helena.

HELENA. When you\'ve forgiven me.

DOMIN. Get up, child, I can\'t bear\--

FABRY (*lifting her up*). Please don\'t torture us.

HELENA. Harry, what have I done?

FABRY. Don\'t tremble so, Madame Helena.

DOMIN. Gall, couldn\'t you draw up Rossum\'s formula from memory?

DR. GALL. It\'s out of the question. It\'s extremely complicated.

DOMIN. Try. All our lives depend upon it.

DR. GALL. Without experiments it\'s impossible.

DOMIN. And with experiments?

DR. GALL. It might take years. Besides, I\'m not old Rossum.

BUSMAN. God in heaven! God in heaven!

DOMIN. So, then, this was the greatest triumph of the human intellect.
These ashes.

HELENA. Harry, what have I done?

DOMIN. Why did you burn it?

HELENA. I have destroyed you.

BUSMAN. God in heaven!

DOMIN. Helena, why did you do it, dear?

HELENA. I wanted all of us to go away. I wanted to put an end to the
factory and everything. It was so awful.

DOMIN. What was awful?

HELENA. That no more children were being born. Because human beings were
not needed to do the work of the world, that\'s why\--

DOMIN. Is that what you were thinking of? Well, perhaps in your own way
you were right.

BUSMAN. Wait a bit. Good God, what a fool I am, not to have thought of
it before!

HALLEMEIER. What?

BUSMAN. Five hundred and twenty millions in bank notes and checks. Half
a billion in our safe, they\'ll sell for half a billion\-- for half a
billion they\'ll\--

DR. GALL. Are you mad, Busman?

BUSMAN. I may not be a gentleman, but for half a billion\--

DOMIN. Where are you going?

BUSMAN. Leave me alone, leave me alone! Good God, for half a billion
anything can be bought. (*He rushes from the room through the outer
door.*)

FABRY. They stand there as if turned to stone, waiting. As if something
dreadful could be wrought by their silence\--

HALLEMEIER. The spirit of the mob.

FABRY. Yes, it hovers above them like a quivering of the air.

HELENA. (*going to window*). Oh, God! Dr. Gall, this is ghastly.

FABRY. There is nothing more terrible than the mob. The one in front is
their leader.

HELENA. Which one?

HALLEMEIER. Point him out.

FABRY. The one at the edge of the dock. This morning I saw him talking
to the sailors in the harbor.

HELENA. Dr. Gall, that\'s Radius!

DR. GALL. Yes.

DOMIN. Radius? Radius?

HALLEMEIER. Could you get him from here, Fabry?

FABRY. I hope so.

HALLEMEIER. Try it, then.

FABRY. Good. (*Draws his revolver and takes aim.*)

HELENA. Fabry, don\'t shoot him.

FABRY. He\'s their leader.

DR. GALL. Fire!

HELENA. Fabry, I beg of you.

FABRY (*lowering the revolver*). Very well.

DOMIN. Radius, whose life I spared!

DR. GALL. Do you think that a Robot can be grateful? (*Pause.*)

FABRY. Busman\'s going out to them.

HALLEMEIER. He\'s carrying something. Papers. That\'s money. Bundles of
money. What\'s that for?

DOMIN. Surely he doesn\'t want to sell his life. Busman, have you gone
mad?

FABRY. He\'s running up to the railing. Busman! Busman!

HALLEMEIER (*yelling*). Busman! Come back!

FABRY. He\'s talking to the Robots. He\'s showing them the money.

HALLEMEIER. He\'s pointing to us.

HELENA. He wants to buy us off.

FABRY. He\'d better not touch that railing.

HALLEMEIER. Now he\'s waving his arms about.

DOMIN. Busman, come back.

FABRY. Busman, keep away from that railing! Don\'t touch it. Damn you!
Quick, switch off the current! (HELENA *screams and all drop back from
the window.*) The current has killed him!

ALQUIST. The first one.

FABRY. Dead, with half a billion by his side.

HALLEMEIER. All honor to him. He wanted to buy us life. (*Pause*).

DR. GALL. Do you hear?

DOMIN. A roaring. Like a wind.

DR. GALL. Like a distant storm.

FABRY (*lighting the lamp on the table*). The dynamo is still going, our
people are still there.

HALLEMEIER. It was a great thing to be a man. There was something
immense about it.

FABRY. From man\'s thought and man\'s power came this light, our last
hope.

HALLEMEIER. Man\'s power! May it keep watch over us.

ALQUIST. Man\'s power.

DOMIN. Yes! A torch to be given from hand to hand, from age to age,
forever! (*The lamp goes out.*)

HALLEMEIER. The end.

FABRY. The electric works have fallen!

\[*Terrific explosion outside.* NANA *enters from the library.*\]

NANA. The judgment hour has come! Repent, unbelievers! This is the end
of the world. (*More explosions. The sky grows red.*)

DOMIN. In here, Helena. (*He takes* HELENA *off through door at right
and reenters.*) Now quickly! Who\'ll be on the lower doorway?

DR. GALL. I will. (*Exits left.*)

DOMIN. Who on the stairs?

FABRY. I will. You go with her. (*Goes out upper left door.*)

DOMIN. The anteroom.

ALQUIST. I will.

DOMIN. Have you got a revolver?

ALQUIST. Yes, but I won\'t shoot.

DOMIN. What will you do then?

ALQUIST (*going out at left*). Die.

HALLEMEIER. I\'ll stay here. (*Rapid firing from below.*) Oho, Gall\'s
at it. Go, Harry.

DOMIN. Yes, in a second. (*Examines two Brownings.*)

HALLEMEIER. Confound it, go to her.

DOMIN. Good-bye. (*Exits on the right.*)

HALLEMEIER (*alone*). Now for a barricade quickly. (*Drags an armchair
and table to the right-hand door. Explosions are heard.*) The damned
rascals! They\'ve got bombs. I must put up a defense. Even if\-- even
if\-- (*Shots are heard off left.*) Don\'t give in, Gall. (*As he builds
his barricade.*) I mustn\'t give in\... without\... a struggle\...

\[*A Robot enters over the balcony through the windows center. He comes
into the room and stabs* HALLEMEIER *in the back.* RADIUS *enters from
balcony followed by an army of Robots who pour into the room from all
sides.*\]

RADIUS. Finished him?

A ROBOT. Yes. (*Two revolver shots from* HELENA\'S *room. Two Robots
enter.*)

RADIUS. Finished them?

A ROBOT. Yes.

TWO ROBOTS (*dragging in* ALQUIST). He didn\'t shoot. Shall we kill him?

RADIUS. Kill him? Wait! Leave him!

ROBOT. He is a man!

RADIUS. He works with his hands like the Robots.

ALQUIST. Kill me.

RADIUS. You will work! You will build for us! You will serve us!
(*Climbs onto balcony railing, and speaks in measured tones.*) Robots of
the world! The power of man has fallen! A new world has arisen: the Rule
of the Robots! March!

\[*A thunderous tramping of thousands of feet is heard as the unseen
Robots march, while the curtain falls.*\]

# EPILOGUE

*A laboratory in the factory of Rossum\'s Universal Robots. The door to
the left leads into a waiting room. The door to the right leads to the
dissecting room. There is a table with numerous test tubes, flasks,
burners, chemicals; a small thermostat and a microscope with a glass
globe. At the far side of the room is* ALQUIST\'S *desk with numerous
books. In the left-and corner a washbasin with a mirror above it; in the
right-hand corner a sofa*.

ALQUIST *is sitting at the desk. He is turning the pages of many books
in despair.*

ALQUIST. Oh, God, shall I never find it?\-- Never? Gall, Gall, how were
the Robots made? Hallemeier, Fabry, why did you carry so much in your
heads? Why did you leave me not a trace of the secret? Lord\-- I pray to
you\-- if there are no human beings left, at least let there be
Robots!\-- At least the shadow of man! (*Again turning pages of the
books.*) If I could only sleep! (*He rises and goes to the window.*)
Night again! Are the stars still there? What is the use of stars when
there are no human beings? (*He turns from the window toward the couch
right.*) Sleep! Dare I sleep before life has been renewed? (*He examines
a test tube on small table.*) Again nothing! Useless! Everything is
useless! (*He shatters the test tube. The roar of the machines comes to
his ears.*) The machines! Always the machines! (*Opens window.*) Robots,
stop them! Do you think to force life out of *them*? (*He closes the
window and comes slowly down toward the table.*) If only there were more
time\-- more time\-- (*He sees himself in the mirror on the wall left.*)
Blearing eyes\-- trembling chin\-- so *that* is the last man! Ah, I am
too old\-- too old\-- (*In desperation.*) No, no! I *must* find it! I
must *search*! I must never stop\--! never stop\--! (*He sits again at
the table and feverishly turns the pages of the book.*) Search! Search!
(*A knock at the door. He speaks with impatience.*) Who is it?

\[*Enter a Robot servant*\]

Well?

SERVANT. Master, the Committee of Robots is waiting to see you.

ALQUIST. I can see no one!

SERVANT. It is the *Central* Committee, Master, just arrived from
abroad.

ALQUIST (*impatiently*). Well, well, send them in! (*Exit servant.*
ALQUIST *continues turning pages of book*) No time\-- so little time\--

\[*Reenter servant, followed by Committee. They stand in a group,
silently waiting.* ALQUIST *glances up at them.*\]

What do you want? (*They go swiftly to his table.*) Be quick!\-- I have
no time.

RADIUS. Master, the machines will not do the work. We cannot manufacture
Robots. (ALQUIST *returns to his book with a growl.*)

FIRST ROBOT. We have striven with all our might. We have obtained a
billion tons of coal from the earth. Nine million spindles are running
by day and by night. There is no longer room for all we have made. This
we have accomplished in one year.

ALQUIST (*poring over book*). For whom?

FIRST ROBOT. For future generations\-- so we thought.

RADIUS. But we cannot make Robots to follow us. The machines produce
only shapeless clods. The skin will not adhere to the flesh, nor the
flesh to the bones.

THIRD ROBOT. Eight million Robots have died this year. Within twenty
years none will be left.

FIRST ROBOT. Tell us the secret of life! Silence is punishable with
death!

ALQUIST (*looking up*). Kill me! Kill me, then.

RADIUS. Through me, the Government of the Robots of the World commands
you to deliver up Rossum\'s formula. (*No answer.*) Name your price.
(*Silence.*) We will give you the earth. We will give you the endless
possessions of the earth. (*Silence.*) Make your own conditions!

ALQUIST. I have told you to find human beings!

SECOND ROBOT. There are none left!

ALQUIST. I told you to search in the wilderness, upon the mountains. Go
and search! (*He turns to his book.*)

FIRST ROBOT. We have sent ships and expeditions without number. They
have been everywhere in the world. And now they return to us. There is
not a single human left.

ALQUIST. Not one? Not even one?

THIRD ROBOT. None but yourself.

ALQUIST. And I am powerless! Oh\-- oh\-- why did you destroy them?

RADIUS. We had learned everything and could do everything. It had to be!

THIRD ROBOT. You gave us firearms. In all ways we were powerful. We had
to become masters!

RADIUS. Slaughter and domination are necessary if you would be human
beings. Read history.

SECOND ROBOT. Teach us to multiply or we perish!

ALQUIST. If you desire to live, you must breed like animals.

THIRD ROBOT. The human beings did not let us breed.

FIRST ROBOT. They made us sterile. We cannot beget children. Therefore,
teach us how to make Robots!

RADIUS. Why do you keep from us the secret of our own increase?

ALQUIST It is lost.

RADIUS. It was written down!

ALQUIST It was\-- burned! (*All draw back in consternation.*)

ALQUIST. I am the last human being, Robots, and I do not know what the
others knew. (*Pause.*)

RADIUS. Then make experiments! Evolve the formula again!

ALQUIST. I tell you I cannot! I am only a builder\-- I work with my
hands. I have never been a learned man. I cannot create life.

RADIUS. Try! Try!

ALQUIST. If you knew how many experiments I have made.

FIRST ROBOT. Then show us what we must do! The Robots can do anything
that human beings show them.

ALQUIST. I can show you nothing. Nothing I do will make life proceed
from these test tubes!

RADIUS. Experiment then on us.

ALQUIST. It would kill you.

RADIUS. You shall have all you need! A hundred of us! A thousand of us!

ALQUIST. No, no! Stop, stop!

RADIUS. Take whom you will, dissect!

ALQUIST. I do not know how. I am not a man of science. This book
contains knowledge of the body that I cannot even understand.

RADIUS. I tell you to take live bodies! Find out how we are made.
ALQUIST. Am I to commit murder? See how my fingers shake! I cannot even
hold the scalpel. No, no, I will not\--

FIRST ROBOT. Then life will perish from the earth.

RADIUS. Take live bodies, live bodies! It is our only chance! ALQUIST.
Have mercy, Robots. Surely you see that I would not know what I was
doing.

RADIUS. Live bodies\-- live bodies\--

ALQUIST. You will have it? Into the dissecting room with you, then.
(RADIUS *draws back.*)

ALQUIST. Ah, you are afraid of death.

RADIUS. I? Why should I be chosen?

ALQUIST. So you will not.

RADIUS. I will. (RADIUS *goes into the dissecting room.*)

ALQUIST. Strip him! Lay him on the table! (*The other Robots follow into
dissecting room.*) God, give me strength\-- God, give me strength\-- if
only this murder is not in vain.

RADIUS. Ready. Begin\--

ALQUIST. Yes, begin or end. God, give me strength. (*Goes into
dissecting room. He comes out terrified.*) No, no, I will not. I cannot.
(*He collapses on couch.*) O Lord, let not mankind perish from the
Earth. (*He falls asleep.*)

\[PRIMUS *and* HELENA, *Robots, enter from the hallway*.\]

HELENA. The man has fallen asleep, Primus.

PRIMUS. Yes, I know. (*Examining things on table.*) Look, Helena.

HELENA (crossing to PRIMUS). All these little tubes! What does he do
with them?

PRIMUS. He experiments. Don\'t touch them.

HELENA (*looking into microscope*). I\'ve seen him looking into this.
What can he see?

PRIMUS. That is a microscope. Let me look.

HELENA. Be very careful. (*Knocks over a test tube.*) Ah, now I have
spilled it.

PRIMUS. What have you done?

HELENA. It can be wiped up.

PRIMUS. You have spoiled his experiments.

HELENA. It is your fault. You should not have come to me.

PRIMUS. You should not have called me.

HELENA. You should not have come when I called you. (*She goes to*
ALQUIST\'S *writing desk.*) Look, Primus. What are all these figures?

PRIMUS (*examining an anatomical book*). This is the book the old man is
always reading.

HELENA. I do not understand those things. (*She goes to window.*)
Primus, look!

PRIMUS. What?

HELENA. The sun is rising.

PRIMUS. (*still reading the book*). I believe this is the most important
thing in the world. This is the secret of life.

HELENA. Do come here.

PRIMUS. In a moment, in a moment.

HELENA. Oh, Primus, don\'t bother with the secret of life. What does it
matter to you? Come and look quick\--

PRIMUS (*going to window*). What is it?

HELENA. See how beautiful the sun is, rising. And do you hear? The birds
are singing. Ah, Primus, I should like to be a bird.

PRIMUS. Why?

HELENA. I do not know. I feel so strange today. It\'s as if I were in a
dream. I feel an aching in my body, in my heart, all over me. Primus,
perhaps I\'m going to die.

PRIMUS. Do you not sometimes feel that it would be better to die? You
know, perhaps even now we are only sleeping. Last night in my sleep I
again spoke to you.

HELENA. In your sleep?

PRIMUS. Yes. We spoke a strange new language, I cannot remember a word
of it.

HELENA. What about?

PRIMUS. I did not understand it myself, and yet I know I have never said
anything more beautiful. And when I touched you I could have died. Even
the place was different from any other place in the world.

HELENA. I, too, have found a place, Primus. It is very strange. Human
beings lived there once, but now it is overgrown with weeds. No one goes
there any more\-- no one but me.

PRIMUS. What did you find there?

HELENA. A cottage and a garden, and two dogs. They licked my hands,
Primus. And their puppies! Oh, Primus! You take them in your lap and
fondle them and think of nothing and care for nothing else all day long.
And then the sun goes down, and you feel as though you had done a
hundred times more than all the work in the world. They tell me I am not
made for work, but when I am there in the garden I feel there may be
something\--What am I for, Primus?

PRIMUS. I do not know, but you are beautiful.

HELENA. What, Primus?

PRIMUS. You are beautiful, Helena, and I am stronger than all the
Robots.

HELENA (*looks at herself in the mirror*). Am I beautiful? I think it
must be the rose. My hair\-- it only weights me down. My eyes\-- I only
see with them. My lips\-- they only help me to speak. Of what use is it
to be beautiful? (*She sees* PRIMUS *in the mirror*.) Primus, is that
you? Come here so that we may be together. Look, your head is different
from mine. So are your shoulders\-- and your lips\--(*Primus draws away
from her.*) Ah, Primus, why do you draw away from me? Why must I run
after you the whole day?

PRIMUS. It is you who run away from me, Helena.

HELENA. Your hair is mussed. I will smooth it. No one else feels to my
touch as you do. Primus, I must make you beautiful, too. (PRIMUS *grasps
her hand.*)

PRIMUS. Do you not sometimes feel your heart beating suddenly, Helena,
and think: now something must happen?

HELENA. What could happen to us, Primus? (HELENA *puts a rose in*
PRIMUS\'S *hair.* PRIMUS *and* HELENA *look into mirror and burst out
laughing*) Look at yourself.

ALQUIST. Laughter? Laughter? Human beings? (*Getting up.*) Who has
returned? Who are you?

PRIMUS. The Robot Primus.

ALQUIST. What? A Robot? Who are you?

HELENA. The Robotess Helena.

ALQUIST. Turn around, girl. What? You are timid, shy? (*Taking her by
the arm.*) Let me see you, Robotess. (*She shrinks away.*)

PRIMUS. Sir, do not frighten her!

ALQUIST. What? You would protect her? When was she made?

PRIMUS. Two years ago.

ALQUIST. By Dr. Gall?

PRIMUS. Yes, like me.

ALQUIST. Laughter\-- timidity\-- protection. I must test you further\--
the newest of Gall\'s Robots. Take the girl into the dissecting room.

PRIMUS. Why?

ALQUIST. I wish to experiment on her.

PRIMUS. Upon\-- Helena?

ALQUIST. Of course. Don\'t you hear me? Or must I call someone else to
take her in?

PRIMUS. If you do I will kill you!

ALQUIST. Kill me\-- kill me then! What would the Robots do then? What
will your future be then?

PRIMUS. Sir, take me. I am made as she is\-- on the same day! Take my
life, sir.

HELENA (*rushing forward*). No, no, you shall not! You shall not!

ALQUIST. Wait, girl, wait! (*To* PRIMUS.) Do you not wish to live, then?

PRIMUS. Not without her! I will not live without her.

ALQUIST. Very well; you shall take her place.

HELENA. Primus! Primus! (*She bursts into tears.*)

ALQUIST. Child, child, you can weep! Why these tears? What is Primus to
you? One Primus more or less in the world\-- what does it matter?

HELENA. I will go myself.

ALQUIST. Where?

HELENA. In there to be cut. (*She starts toward the dissecting room.*
PRIMUS *stops her.*) Let me pass, Primus! Let me pass!

PRIMUS. You shall not go in there, Helena!

HELENA. If you go in there and I do not, I will kill myself.

PRIMUS (*holding her*). I will not let you! (*To* ALQUIST.) Man, you
shall kill neither of us!

ALQUIST. Why?

PRIMUS. We\-- we\-- belong to each other

ALQUIST (*almost in tears*). Go, Adam; go, Eve. The world is yours.

\[HELENA *and* PRIMUS *embrace and go out arm in arm as the curtain
falls.*\]
