# Act III

## THE SAME AFTERNOON

HELENA\'S *drawing room as before.* DOMIN *comes into the room.* DR.

GALL *is looking out of the window, through closed shutters.* ALQUIST
*is seated down right.*

DOMIN. Any more of them?

DR. GALL. Yes. There standing like a wall, beyond the garden railing.
Why are they so quiet? It\'s monstrous to be besieged with silence.

DOMIN. I should like to know what they are waiting for. They must make a
start any minute now. If they lean against the railing they\'ll snap it
like a match.

DR. GALL. They aren\'t armed.

DOMIN. We couldn\'t hold our own for five minutes. Man alive, they\'d
overwhelm us like an avalanche. Why don\'t they make a rush for it? I
say\--

DR. GALL. Well?

DOMIN. I\'d like to know what would become of us in the next ten
minutes. They\'ve got us in a vise. We\'re done for, Gall. (*Pause.*)

DR. GALL. You know, we made one serious mistake.

DOMIN. What?

DR. GALL. We made the Robots\' faces too much alike. A hundred thousand
faces all alike, all facing this way. A hundred thousand expressionless
bubbles. It\'s like a nightmare.

DOMIN. You think if they\'d been different\--

DR. GALL. It wouldn\'t have been such an awful sight!

DOMIN (*looking through a telescope toward the harbor*). I\'d like to
know what they unloading from the *Amelia*.

DR. GALL. Not firearms.

\[FABRY *and* HALLEMEIER *rush into the room carrying electric
cables.*\]

FABRY. All right, Hallemeier, lay down that wire.

HALLEMEIER. That was a bit of work. What\'s the news?

DR. GALL. We\'re completely surrounded.

HALLEMEIER. We\'ve barricaded the passage and the stairs. Any water
here? (*Drinks.*) God, what swarms of them! I don\'t like the looks of
them, Domin. There\'s a feeling of death about it all.

FABRY. Ready!

DR. GALL. What\'s that wire for, Fabry?

FABRY. The electrical installation. Now we can run the current all along
the garden railing whenever we like. If any one touches it he\'ll know
it. We\'ve still got some people there anyhow.

DR. GALL. Where?

FABRY. In the electrical works. At least I hope so. (*Goes to lamp on
table behind sofa and turns on lamp.*) Ah, they\'re there, and they\'re
working. (*Puts out lamp.*) So long as that\'ll burn we\'re all right.

HALLEMEIER. The barricades are all right, too, Fabry.

FABRY Your barricades! I can put twelve hundred volts into that railing.

DOMIN. Where\'s Busman?

FABRY Downstairs in the office. He\'s working out some calculations.
I\'ve called him. We must have a conference.

\[HELENA *is heard playing the piano in the library.* HALLEMEIER *goes
to the door and stands, listening.*\]

ALQUIST. Thank God, Madame Helena can still play.

\[BUSMAN *enters, carrying the ledgers.*\]

FABRY. Look out, Bus, look out for the wires.

DR. GALL. What\'s that you\'re carrying?

BUSMAN (*going to table*). The ledgers, my boy! I\'d like to wind up the
accounts before\-- before\-- well, this time I shan\'t wait till the new
year to strike a balance. What\'s up? (*Goes to the window.*) Absolutely
quiet.

DR. GALL. Can\'t you see anything?

BUSMAN. Nothing but blue\-- blue everywhere.

DR. GALL. That\'s the Robots. (BUSMAN *sits down at the table and opens
the ledgers.*)

DOMIN. The Robots are unloading firearms from the *Amelia*.

BUSMAN. Well, what of it? How can I stop them?

DOMIN. We can\'t stop them.

BUSMAN. Then let me go on with my accounts. (*Goes on with his work.*)

DOMIN (*picking up telescope and looking into the harbor*). Good God,
the *Ultimus* has trained her guns on us!

DR. GALL. Who\'s done *that*?

DOMIN. The Robots on board.

FABRY. H\'m, then, of course, then\-- then, that\'s the end of us.

DR. GALL. You mean?

FABRY. The Robots are practiced marksmen.

DOMIN. Yes. It\'s inevitable. (*Pause.*)

DR. GALL. It was criminal of old Europe to teach the Robots to fight.
Damn them! Couldn\'t they have given us a rest with their politics? It
was a crime to make soldiers of them.

ALQUIST. It was a crime to make Robots.

DOMIN. What?

ALQUIST. It was a crime to make Robots.

DOMIN. No, Alquist, I don\'t regret that even today.

ALQUIST. Not even today?

DOMIN. Not even today, the last day of civilization. It was a colossal
achievement.

BUSMAN (*sotto voce*). Three hundred sixty million.

DOMIN. Alquist, this is our last hour. We are already speaking half in
the other world. It was not an evil dream to shatter the servitude of
labor\-- the dreadful and humiliating labor that man had to undergo.
Work was too hard. Life was too hard. And to overcome that\--

ALQUIST. Was not what the two Rossums dreamed of. Old Rossum only

thought of his Godless tricks and the young one of his millions. And
that\'s not what your R.U.R. shareholders dream of either. They dream of
dividends, and their dividends are the ruin of mankind.

DOMIN. To hell with your dividends! Do you suppose I\'d have done an
hour\'s work for them? It was for myself that I worked, for my own
satisfaction. I wanted man to become the master, so that he shouldn\'t
live merely for a crust of bread. I wanted not a single soul to be
broken by other people\'s machinery. I wanted nothing, nothing, nothing
to be left of this appalling social structure. I\'m revolted by poverty.
I wanted a new generation. I wanted\-- I thought\--

ALQUIST. Well?

DOMIN. I wanted to turn the whole of mankind into an aristocracy of the
world. An aristocracy nourished by millions of mechanical slaves.
Unrestricted, free, and consummated in man. And maybe more than man.

ALQUIST. Superman?

DOMIN. Yes. Oh, only to have a hundred years of time! Another hundred
years for the future of mankind.

BUSMAN (*sotto voce*). Carried forward, four hundred and twenty
millions. (*The music stops.*)

HALLEMEIER. What a fine thing music is! We ought to have gone in for
that before.

FABRY. Gone in for what?

HALLEMEIER. Beauty, lovely things. What a lot of lovely things there
are! The world was wonderful and we\-- we here\-- tell me, what
enjoyment did we have?

BUSMAN (*sotto voce*). Five hundred and twenty millions.

HALLEMEIER (*at the window*). Life was a big thing. Life was\-- Fabry,
switch the current into that railing.

FABRY. Why?

HALLEMEIER. They\'re grabbing hold of it.

DR. GALL. Connect it up.

HALLEMEIER. Fine! That\'s doubled them up! Two, three, four killed.

DR. GALL. They\'re retreating!

HALLEMEIER. Five killed!

DR. GALL. The first encounter!

HALLEMEIER. They\'re charred to cinders, my boy. Who says we must give
up?

DOMIN (*wiping his forehead*). Perhaps we\'ve been killed these hundred
years and are only ghosts. It\'s as if I had been through all this
before; as if I\'d already had a mortal wound here in the throat. And
you, Fabry, had once been shot in the head. And you, Gall, torn limb
from limb. And Hallemeier knifed.

HALLEMEIER. Fancy me being knifed. (*Pause.*) Why are you so quiet, you
fools. Speak, can\'t you?

ALQUIST. And who is to blame for all this?

HALLEMEIER. Nobody is to blame except the Robots.

ALQUIST. No, it is we who are to blame. You, Domin, myself, all of us.
For our own selfish ends, for profit, for progress, we have destroyed
mankind. Now we\'ll burst with all our greatness.

HALLEMEIER. Rubbish, man. Mankind can\'t be wiped out so easily.

ALQUIST. It\'s our fault. It\'s our fault.

DR. GALL. No! I\'m to blame for this, for everything that\'s happened.

FABRY. You, Gall?

DR. GALL. I changed the Robots.

BUSMAN. What\'s that?

DR. GALL. I changed the character of the Robots. I changed the way of
making them. Just a few details about their bodies. Chiefly\-- chiefly,
their\-- their irritability.

HALLEMEIER. Damn it, why?

BUSMAN. What did you do it for?

FABRY. Why didn\'t you say anything?

DR. GALL. I did it in secret. I was transforming them into human beings.
In certain respects they\'re already above us. They\'re stronger than we
are.

FABRY. And what\'s that got to do with the revolt of the Robots?

DR. GALL. Everything, in my opinion. They\'ve ceased to be machines.
They\'re already aware of their superiority, and they hate us. They hate
all that is human.

DOMIN. Perhaps we\'re only phantoms!

FABRY. Stop, Harry. We haven\'t much time! Dr. Gall!

DOMIN. Fabry, Fabry, how your forehead bleeds, where the shot pierced
it!

FABRY. Be silent! Dr. Gall, you admit changing the way of making the
Robots?

DR. GALL. Yes.

FABRY. Were you aware of what might be the consequences of your
experiment?

DR. GALL. I was bound to reckon with such a possibility.

\[HELENA *enters the drawing room from left.*\]

FABRY. Why did you do it, then?

DR. GALL. For my own satisfaction. The experiment was my own.

HELENA. That\'s not true, Dr. Gall!

DOMIN. Helena, you? Let\'s look at you. Oh, it\'s terrible to be dead.

HELENA. Stop, Harry.

DOMIN. No, no, embrace me. Helena don\'t leave me now. You are life
itself.

HELENA. No, dear, I won\'t leave you. But I must tell them. Dr. Gall is
not guilty.

DOMIN. Excuse me, Gall was under certain obligations.

HELENA. No, Harry. He did it because I wanted it. Tell them, Gall, how
many years ago did I ask you to\--?

DR. GALL. I did it on my own responsibility.

HELENA. Don\'t believe him, Harry. I asked him to give the Robots souls.

DOMIN. This has nothing to do with the soul.

HELENA. That\'s what he said. He said that he could change only a
physiological\-- a physiological\--

HALLEMEIER A physiological correlate?

HELENA. Yes. But it meant so much to me that he should do even that.

DOMIN. Why?

HELENA. I thought that if they were more like us they would understand
us better. That they couldn\'t hate us if they were only a little

more human.

DOMIN. Nobody can hate man more than man.

HELENA. Oh, don\'t speak like that, Harry. It was so terrible, this
cruel strangeness between us and them. That\'s why I asked Gall to
change the Robots. I swear to you that he didn\'t want to.

DOMIN. But he did it.

HELENA. Because I asked him.

DR. GALL. I did it for myself as an experiment.

HELENA. No, Dr. Gall! I knew you wouldn\'t refuse me.

DOMIN. Why?

HELENA. You know, Harry.

DOMIN. Yes, because he\'s in love with you\-- like all of them.
(*Pause.*)

HALLEMEIER. Good God! They\'re sprouting up out of the earth! Why,
perhaps these very walls will change into Robots.

BUSMAN. Gall, when did you actually start these tricks of yours?

DR. GALL. Three years ago.

BUSMAN. Aha! That means for every million of the good old Robots
there\'s only one of Gall\'s improved pattern.

DOMIN. What of it?

BUSMAN. That it\'s practically of no consequence whatever.

FABRY. Busman\'s right!

BUSMAN. I should think so, my boy! But do you know what is to blame for
all this lovely mess?

FABRY. What?

BUSMAN. The number. Upon my soul we might have known that some day or
other the Robots would be stronger than human beings, and that this was
bound to happen, and we were doing all we could to bring it about as
soon as possible. You, Domin, you, Fabry, myself\--

DOMIN. Are your accusing us?

BUSMAN. Oh, do you suppose the management controls the output? It\'s the
demand that controls the output.

HELENA. And is it for that we must perish?

BUSMAN. That\'s a nasty word, Madame Helena. We don\'t want to perish. I
don\'t, anyhow.

DOMIN. No. What do you want to do?

BUSMAN. I want to get out of this, that\'s all.

DOMIN. Oh, stop it, Busman.

BUSMAN. Seriously, Harry, I think we might try it.

DOMIN. How?

BUSMAN. By fair means. I do everything by fair means. Give me a free
hand and I\'ll negotiate with the Robots.

DOMIN. By fair means?

BUSMAN. Of course. For instance, I\'ll say to them: \"Worthy and
worshipful Robots, you have everything! You have intellect, you have
power, you have firearms. But we have just one interesting screed, a
dirty old yellow scrap of paper\--

DOMIN. Rossum\'s manuscript?

BUSMAN. Yes. \"And that,\" I\'ll tell them, \"contains an account of
your illustrious origin, the noble process of your manufacture,\" and so
on. \"Worthy Robots, without this scribble on that paper you will not be
able to produce a single new colleague. In another twenty years there
will not be one living specimen of a Robot that you could exhibit in a
menagerie. My esteemed friends, that would be a great blow to you, but
if you will let all of us human beings on Rossum\'s Island go on board
that ship we will deliver the factory and the secret of the process to
you in return. You allow us to get away and we allow you to manufacture
yourselves. Worthy Robots, that is a fair deal. Something for
something.\" That\'s what I\'d say to them, my boys.

DOMIN. Busman, do you think we\'d sell the manuscript?

BUSMAN. Yes, I do. If not in a friendly way, then\-- Either we sell it
or they\'ll find it. Just as you like.

DOMIN. Busman, we can destroy Rossum\'s manuscript.

BUSMAN. Then we destroy everything\... not only the manuscript but
ourselves. Do as you think fit.

DOMIN. There are over thirty of us on this island. Are we to sell the
secret and save that many human souls, at the risk of enslaving mankind?

BUSMAN. Why, you\'re mad! Who\'d sell the whole manuscript?

DOMIN. Busman, no cheating!

BUSMAN. Well then, sell; but afterward\--

DOMIN. Well?

BUSMAN. Let\'s suppose this happens: When we\'re on board the *Ultimus*
I\'ll stop up my ears with cotton wool, lie down somewhere in the hold,
and you\'ll train the guns on the factory, and blow it to smithereens,
and with it Rossum\'s secret.

FABRY. No!

DOMIN. Busman, you\'re no gentleman. If we sell, then it will be a
straight sale.

BUSMAN. It\'s in the interest of humanity to\--

DOMIN. It\'s in the interest of humanity to keep our word.

HALLEMEIER. Oh, come, what rubbish!

DOMIN. This is a fearful decision. We\'re selling the destiny of
mankind. Are we to sell or destroy? Fabry?

FABRY. Sell.

DOMIN. Gall?

DR. GAIL. Sell.

DOMIN. Hallemeier?

HALLEMEIER. Sell, of course!

DOMIN. Alquist?

ALQUIST. As God wills.

DOMIN. Very well. It shall be as you wish, gentlemen.

HELENA. Harry, you\'re not asking me.

DOMIN. No, child. Don\'t you worry about it.

FABRY. Who\'ll do the negotiating?

BUSMAN. I will.

DOMIN. Wait till I bring the manuscript. (*He goes into room at right.*)

HELENA. Harry, don\'t go! (*Pause,* HELENA *sinks into a chair.*)

FABRY (*looking out of window*). Oh, to escape you, you matter in
revolt; oh, to preserve human life, if only upon a single vessel\--

DR. GALL. Don\'t be afraid, Madame Helena. We\'ll sail far away from
here; we\'ll begin life all over again\--

HELENA. Oh, Gall, don\'t speak.

FABRY. It isn\'t too late. It will be a little State with one ship.
Alquist will build us a house and you shall rule over us.

HALLEMEIER. Madame Helena, Fabry\'s right.

HELENA (*breaking down*). Oh, stop! Stop!

BUSMAN. Good! I don\'t mind beginning all over again. That suits me
right down to the ground.

FABRY. And this little State of ours could be the center of future life.
A place of refuge where we could gather strength. Why, in a few hundred
years we could conquer the world again.

ALQUIST. You believe that even today?

FABRY. Yes, even today!

BUSMAN. Amen. You see, Madame Helena, we\'re not so badly off.

\[DOMIN *storms into the room.*\]

DOMIN. (*hoarsely*). Where\'s old Rossum\'s manuscript?

BUSMAN. In your strongbox, of course.

DOMIN. Someone\-- has\-- stolen it!

DR. GALL. Impossible.

DOMIN. Who has stolen it?

HELENA (*standing up*). I did.

DOMIN. Where did you put it?

HELENA. Harry, I\'ll tell you everything. Only forgive me.

DOMIN. Where did you put it?

HELENA. This morning\-- I burned\-- the two copies.

DOMIN. Burned them? Where? In the fireplace?

HELENA (*throwing herself on her knees*). For heaven\'s sake, Harry.

DOMIN (*going to fireplace*). Nothing, nothing but ashes. Wait, what\'s
this? (*Picks out a charred piece of paper and reads.*) \"By adding\--\"

DR. GALL. Let\'s see. \"By adding biogen to\--\" That\'s all.

DOMIN. Is that part of it?

DR. GALL. Yes.

BUSMAN. God in heaven!

DOMIN. Then we\'re done for. Get up, Helena.

HELENA. When you\'ve forgiven me.

DOMIN. Get up, child, I can\'t bear\--

FABRY (*lifting her up*). Please don\'t torture us.

HELENA. Harry, what have I done?

FABRY. Don\'t tremble so, Madame Helena.

DOMIN. Gall, couldn\'t you draw up Rossum\'s formula from memory?

DR. GALL. It\'s out of the question. It\'s extremely complicated.

DOMIN. Try. All our lives depend upon it.

DR. GALL. Without experiments it\'s impossible.

DOMIN. And with experiments?

DR. GALL. It might take years. Besides, I\'m not old Rossum.

BUSMAN. God in heaven! God in heaven!

DOMIN. So, then, this was the greatest triumph of the human intellect.
These ashes.

HELENA. Harry, what have I done?

DOMIN. Why did you burn it?

HELENA. I have destroyed you.

BUSMAN. God in heaven!

DOMIN. Helena, why did you do it, dear?

HELENA. I wanted all of us to go away. I wanted to put an end to the
factory and everything. It was so awful.

DOMIN. What was awful?

HELENA. That no more children were being born. Because human beings were
not needed to do the work of the world, that\'s why\--

DOMIN. Is that what you were thinking of? Well, perhaps in your own way
you were right.

BUSMAN. Wait a bit. Good God, what a fool I am, not to have thought of
it before!

HALLEMEIER. What?

BUSMAN. Five hundred and twenty millions in bank notes and checks. Half
a billion in our safe, they\'ll sell for half a billion\-- for half a
billion they\'ll\--

DR. GALL. Are you mad, Busman?

BUSMAN. I may not be a gentleman, but for half a billion\--

DOMIN. Where are you going?

BUSMAN. Leave me alone, leave me alone! Good God, for half a billion
anything can be bought. (*He rushes from the room through the outer
door.*)

FABRY. They stand there as if turned to stone, waiting. As if something
dreadful could be wrought by their silence\--

HALLEMEIER. The spirit of the mob.

FABRY. Yes, it hovers above them like a quivering of the air.

HELENA. (*going to window*). Oh, God! Dr. Gall, this is ghastly.

FABRY. There is nothing more terrible than the mob. The one in front is
their leader.

HELENA. Which one?

HALLEMEIER. Point him out.

FABRY. The one at the edge of the dock. This morning I saw him talking
to the sailors in the harbor.

HELENA. Dr. Gall, that\'s Radius!

DR. GALL. Yes.

DOMIN. Radius? Radius?

HALLEMEIER. Could you get him from here, Fabry?

FABRY. I hope so.

HALLEMEIER. Try it, then.

FABRY. Good. (*Draws his revolver and takes aim.*)

HELENA. Fabry, don\'t shoot him.

FABRY. He\'s their leader.

DR. GALL. Fire!

HELENA. Fabry, I beg of you.

FABRY (*lowering the revolver*). Very well.

DOMIN. Radius, whose life I spared!

DR. GALL. Do you think that a Robot can be grateful? (*Pause.*)

FABRY. Busman\'s going out to them.

HALLEMEIER. He\'s carrying something. Papers. That\'s money. Bundles of
money. What\'s that for?

DOMIN. Surely he doesn\'t want to sell his life. Busman, have you gone
mad?

FABRY. He\'s running up to the railing. Busman! Busman!

HALLEMEIER (*yelling*). Busman! Come back!

FABRY. He\'s talking to the Robots. He\'s showing them the money.

HALLEMEIER. He\'s pointing to us.

HELENA. He wants to buy us off.

FABRY. He\'d better not touch that railing.

HALLEMEIER. Now he\'s waving his arms about.

DOMIN. Busman, come back.

FABRY. Busman, keep away from that railing! Don\'t touch it. Damn you!
Quick, switch off the current! (HELENA *screams and all drop back from
the window.*) The current has killed him!

ALQUIST. The first one.

FABRY. Dead, with half a billion by his side.

HALLEMEIER. All honor to him. He wanted to buy us life. (*Pause*).

DR. GALL. Do you hear?

DOMIN. A roaring. Like a wind.

DR. GALL. Like a distant storm.

FABRY (*lighting the lamp on the table*). The dynamo is still going, our
people are still there.

HALLEMEIER. It was a great thing to be a man. There was something
immense about it.

FABRY. From man\'s thought and man\'s power came this light, our last
hope.

HALLEMEIER. Man\'s power! May it keep watch over us.

ALQUIST. Man\'s power.

DOMIN. Yes! A torch to be given from hand to hand, from age to age,
forever! (*The lamp goes out.*)

HALLEMEIER. The end.

FABRY. The electric works have fallen!

\[*Terrific explosion outside.* NANA *enters from the library.*\]

NANA. The judgment hour has come! Repent, unbelievers! This is the end
of the world. (*More explosions. The sky grows red.*)

DOMIN. In here, Helena. (*He takes* HELENA *off through door at right
and reenters.*) Now quickly! Who\'ll be on the lower doorway?

DR. GALL. I will. (*Exits left.*)

DOMIN. Who on the stairs?

FABRY. I will. You go with her. (*Goes out upper left door.*)

DOMIN. The anteroom.

ALQUIST. I will.

DOMIN. Have you got a revolver?

ALQUIST. Yes, but I won\'t shoot.

DOMIN. What will you do then?

ALQUIST (*going out at left*). Die.

HALLEMEIER. I\'ll stay here. (*Rapid firing from below.*) Oho, Gall\'s
at it. Go, Harry.

DOMIN. Yes, in a second. (*Examines two Brownings.*)

HALLEMEIER. Confound it, go to her.

DOMIN. Good-bye. (*Exits on the right.*)

HALLEMEIER (*alone*). Now for a barricade quickly. (*Drags an armchair
and table to the right-hand door. Explosions are heard.*) The damned
rascals! They\'ve got bombs. I must put up a defense. Even if\-- even
if\-- (*Shots are heard off left.*) Don\'t give in, Gall. (*As he builds
his barricade.*) I mustn\'t give in\... without\... a struggle\...

\[*A Robot enters over the balcony through the windows center. He comes
into the room and stabs* HALLEMEIER *in the back.* RADIUS *enters from
balcony followed by an army of Robots who pour into the room from all
sides.*\]

RADIUS. Finished him?

A ROBOT. Yes. (*Two revolver shots from* HELENA\'S *room. Two Robots
enter.*)

RADIUS. Finished them?

A ROBOT. Yes.

TWO ROBOTS (*dragging in* ALQUIST). He didn\'t shoot. Shall we kill him?

RADIUS. Kill him? Wait! Leave him!

ROBOT. He is a man!

RADIUS. He works with his hands like the Robots.

ALQUIST. Kill me.

RADIUS. You will work! You will build for us! You will serve us!
(*Climbs onto balcony railing, and speaks in measured tones.*) Robots of
the world! The power of man has fallen! A new world has arisen: the Rule
of the Robots! March!

\[*A thunderous tramping of thousands of feet is heard as the unseen
Robots march, while the curtain falls.*\]

# EPILOGUE

*A laboratory in the factory of Rossum\'s Universal Robots. The door to
the left leads into a waiting room. The door to the right leads to the
dissecting room. There is a table with numerous test tubes, flasks,
burners, chemicals; a small thermostat and a microscope with a glass
globe. At the far side of the room is* ALQUIST\'S *desk with numerous
books. In the left-and corner a washbasin with a mirror above it; in the
right-hand corner a sofa*.

ALQUIST *is sitting at the desk. He is turning the pages of many books
in despair.*

ALQUIST. Oh, God, shall I never find it?\-- Never? Gall, Gall, how were
the Robots made? Hallemeier, Fabry, why did you carry so much in your
heads? Why did you leave me not a trace of the secret? Lord\-- I pray to
you\-- if there are no human beings left, at least let there be
Robots!\-- At least the shadow of man! (*Again turning pages of the
books.*) If I could only sleep! (*He rises and goes to the window.*)
Night again! Are the stars still there? What is the use of stars when
there are no human beings? (*He turns from the window toward the couch
right.*) Sleep! Dare I sleep before life has been renewed? (*He examines
a test tube on small table.*) Again nothing! Useless! Everything is
useless! (*He shatters the test tube. The roar of the machines comes to
his ears.*) The machines! Always the machines! (*Opens window.*) Robots,
stop them! Do you think to force life out of *them*? (*He closes the
window and comes slowly down toward the table.*) If only there were more
time\-- more time\-- (*He sees himself in the mirror on the wall left.*)
Blearing eyes\-- trembling chin\-- so *that* is the last man! Ah, I am
too old\-- too old\-- (*In desperation.*) No, no! I *must* find it! I
must *search*! I must never stop\--! never stop\--! (*He sits again at
the table and feverishly turns the pages of the book.*) Search! Search!
(*A knock at the door. He speaks with impatience.*) Who is it?

\[*Enter a Robot servant*\]

Well?

SERVANT. Master, the Committee of Robots is waiting to see you.

ALQUIST. I can see no one!

SERVANT. It is the *Central* Committee, Master, just arrived from
abroad.

ALQUIST (*impatiently*). Well, well, send them in! (*Exit servant.*
ALQUIST *continues turning pages of book*) No time\-- so little time\--

\[*Reenter servant, followed by Committee. They stand in a group,
silently waiting.* ALQUIST *glances up at them.*\]

What do you want? (*They go swiftly to his table.*) Be quick!\-- I have
no time.

RADIUS. Master, the machines will not do the work. We cannot manufacture
Robots. (ALQUIST *returns to his book with a growl.*)

FIRST ROBOT. We have striven with all our might. We have obtained a
billion tons of coal from the earth. Nine million spindles are running
by day and by night. There is no longer room for all we have made. This
we have accomplished in one year.

ALQUIST (*poring over book*). For whom?

FIRST ROBOT. For future generations\-- so we thought.

RADIUS. But we cannot make Robots to follow us. The machines produce
only shapeless clods. The skin will not adhere to the flesh, nor the
flesh to the bones.

THIRD ROBOT. Eight million Robots have died this year. Within twenty
years none will be left.

FIRST ROBOT. Tell us the secret of life! Silence is punishable with
death!

ALQUIST (*looking up*). Kill me! Kill me, then.

RADIUS. Through me, the Government of the Robots of the World commands
you to deliver up Rossum\'s formula. (*No answer.*) Name your price.
(*Silence.*) We will give you the earth. We will give you the endless
possessions of the earth. (*Silence.*) Make your own conditions!

ALQUIST. I have told you to find human beings!

SECOND ROBOT. There are none left!

ALQUIST. I told you to search in the wilderness, upon the mountains. Go
and search! (*He turns to his book.*)

FIRST ROBOT. We have sent ships and expeditions without number. They
have been everywhere in the world. And now they return to us. There is
not a single human left.

ALQUIST. Not one? Not even one?

THIRD ROBOT. None but yourself.

ALQUIST. And I am powerless! Oh\-- oh\-- why did you destroy them?

RADIUS. We had learned everything and could do everything. It had to be!

THIRD ROBOT. You gave us firearms. In all ways we were powerful. We had
to become masters!

RADIUS. Slaughter and domination are necessary if you would be human
beings. Read history.

SECOND ROBOT. Teach us to multiply or we perish!

ALQUIST. If you desire to live, you must breed like animals.

THIRD ROBOT. The human beings did not let us breed.

FIRST ROBOT. They made us sterile. We cannot beget children. Therefore,
teach us how to make Robots!

RADIUS. Why do you keep from us the secret of our own increase?

ALQUIST It is lost.

RADIUS. It was written down!

ALQUIST It was\-- burned! (*All draw back in consternation.*)

ALQUIST. I am the last human being, Robots, and I do not know what the
others knew. (*Pause.*)

RADIUS. Then make experiments! Evolve the formula again!

ALQUIST. I tell you I cannot! I am only a builder\-- I work with my
hands. I have never been a learned man. I cannot create life.

RADIUS. Try! Try!

ALQUIST. If you knew how many experiments I have made.

FIRST ROBOT. Then show us what we must do! The Robots can do anything
that human beings show them.

ALQUIST. I can show you nothing. Nothing I do will make life proceed
from these test tubes!

RADIUS. Experiment then on us.

ALQUIST. It would kill you.

RADIUS. You shall have all you need! A hundred of us! A thousand of us!

ALQUIST. No, no! Stop, stop!

RADIUS. Take whom you will, dissect!

ALQUIST. I do not know how. I am not a man of science. This book
contains knowledge of the body that I cannot even understand.

RADIUS. I tell you to take live bodies! Find out how we are made.
ALQUIST. Am I to commit murder? See how my fingers shake! I cannot even
hold the scalpel. No, no, I will not\--

FIRST ROBOT. Then life will perish from the earth.

RADIUS. Take live bodies, live bodies! It is our only chance! ALQUIST.
Have mercy, Robots. Surely you see that I would not know what I was
doing.

RADIUS. Live bodies\-- live bodies\--

ALQUIST. You will have it? Into the dissecting room with you, then.
(RADIUS *draws back.*)

ALQUIST. Ah, you are afraid of death.

RADIUS. I? Why should I be chosen?

ALQUIST. So you will not.

RADIUS. I will. (RADIUS *goes into the dissecting room.*)

ALQUIST. Strip him! Lay him on the table! (*The other Robots follow into
dissecting room.*) God, give me strength\-- God, give me strength\-- if
only this murder is not in vain.

RADIUS. Ready. Begin\--

ALQUIST. Yes, begin or end. God, give me strength. (*Goes into
dissecting room. He comes out terrified.*) No, no, I will not. I cannot.
(*He collapses on couch.*) O Lord, let not mankind perish from the
Earth. (*He falls asleep.*)

\[PRIMUS *and* HELENA, *Robots, enter from the hallway*.\]

HELENA. The man has fallen asleep, Primus.

PRIMUS. Yes, I know. (*Examining things on table.*) Look, Helena.

HELENA (crossing to PRIMUS). All these little tubes! What does he do
with them?

PRIMUS. He experiments. Don\'t touch them.

HELENA (*looking into microscope*). I\'ve seen him looking into this.
What can he see?

PRIMUS. That is a microscope. Let me look.

HELENA. Be very careful. (*Knocks over a test tube.*) Ah, now I have
spilled it.

PRIMUS. What have you done?

HELENA. It can be wiped up.

PRIMUS. You have spoiled his experiments.

HELENA. It is your fault. You should not have come to me.

PRIMUS. You should not have called me.

HELENA. You should not have come when I called you. (*She goes to*
ALQUIST\'S *writing desk.*) Look, Primus. What are all these figures?

PRIMUS (*examining an anatomical book*). This is the book the old man is
always reading.

HELENA. I do not understand those things. (*She goes to window.*)
Primus, look!

PRIMUS. What?

HELENA. The sun is rising.

PRIMUS. (*still reading the book*). I believe this is the most important
thing in the world. This is the secret of life.

HELENA. Do come here.

PRIMUS. In a moment, in a moment.

HELENA. Oh, Primus, don\'t bother with the secret of life. What does it
matter to you? Come and look quick\--

PRIMUS (*going to window*). What is it?

HELENA. See how beautiful the sun is, rising. And do you hear? The birds
are singing. Ah, Primus, I should like to be a bird.

PRIMUS. Why?

HELENA. I do not know. I feel so strange today. It\'s as if I were in a
dream. I feel an aching in my body, in my heart, all over me. Primus,
perhaps I\'m going to die.

PRIMUS. Do you not sometimes feel that it would be better to die? You
know, perhaps even now we are only sleeping. Last night in my sleep I
again spoke to you.

HELENA. In your sleep?

PRIMUS. Yes. We spoke a strange new language, I cannot remember a word
of it.

HELENA. What about?

PRIMUS. I did not understand it myself, and yet I know I have never said
anything more beautiful. And when I touched you I could have died. Even
the place was different from any other place in the world.

HELENA. I, too, have found a place, Primus. It is very strange. Human
beings lived there once, but now it is overgrown with weeds. No one goes
there any more\-- no one but me.

PRIMUS. What did you find there?

HELENA. A cottage and a garden, and two dogs. They licked my hands,
Primus. And their puppies! Oh, Primus! You take them in your lap and
fondle them and think of nothing and care for nothing else all day long.
And then the sun goes down, and you feel as though you had done a
hundred times more than all the work in the world. They tell me I am not
made for work, but when I am there in the garden I feel there may be
something\--What am I for, Primus?

PRIMUS. I do not know, but you are beautiful.

HELENA. What, Primus?

PRIMUS. You are beautiful, Helena, and I am stronger than all the
Robots.

HELENA (*looks at herself in the mirror*). Am I beautiful? I think it
must be the rose. My hair\-- it only weights me down. My eyes\-- I only
see with them. My lips\-- they only help me to speak. Of what use is it
to be beautiful? (*She sees* PRIMUS *in the mirror*.) Primus, is that
you? Come here so that we may be together. Look, your head is different
from mine. So are your shoulders\-- and your lips\--(*Primus draws away
from her.*) Ah, Primus, why do you draw away from me? Why must I run
after you the whole day?

PRIMUS. It is you who run away from me, Helena.

HELENA. Your hair is mussed. I will smooth it. No one else feels to my
touch as you do. Primus, I must make you beautiful, too. (PRIMUS *grasps
her hand.*)

PRIMUS. Do you not sometimes feel your heart beating suddenly, Helena,
and think: now something must happen?

HELENA. What could happen to us, Primus? (HELENA *puts a rose in*
PRIMUS\'S *hair.* PRIMUS *and* HELENA *look into mirror and burst out
laughing*) Look at yourself.

ALQUIST. Laughter? Laughter? Human beings? (*Getting up.*) Who has
returned? Who are you?

PRIMUS. The Robot Primus.

ALQUIST. What? A Robot? Who are you?

HELENA. The Robotess Helena.

ALQUIST. Turn around, girl. What? You are timid, shy? (*Taking her by
the arm.*) Let me see you, Robotess. (*She shrinks away.*)

PRIMUS. Sir, do not frighten her!

ALQUIST. What? You would protect her? When was she made?

PRIMUS. Two years ago.

ALQUIST. By Dr. Gall?

PRIMUS. Yes, like me.

ALQUIST. Laughter\-- timidity\-- protection. I must test you further\--
the newest of Gall\'s Robots. Take the girl into the dissecting room.

PRIMUS. Why?

ALQUIST. I wish to experiment on her.

PRIMUS. Upon\-- Helena?

ALQUIST. Of course. Don\'t you hear me? Or must I call someone else to
take her in?

PRIMUS. If you do I will kill you!

ALQUIST. Kill me\-- kill me then! What would the Robots do then? What
will your future be then?

PRIMUS. Sir, take me. I am made as she is\-- on the same day! Take my
life, sir.

HELENA (*rushing forward*). No, no, you shall not! You shall not!

ALQUIST. Wait, girl, wait! (*To* PRIMUS.) Do you not wish to live, then?

PRIMUS. Not without her! I will not live without her.

ALQUIST. Very well; you shall take her place.

HELENA. Primus! Primus! (*She bursts into tears.*)

ALQUIST. Child, child, you can weep! Why these tears? What is Primus to
you? One Primus more or less in the world\-- what does it matter?

HELENA. I will go myself.

ALQUIST. Where?

HELENA. In there to be cut. (*She starts toward the dissecting room.*
PRIMUS *stops her.*) Let me pass, Primus! Let me pass!

PRIMUS. You shall not go in there, Helena!

HELENA. If you go in there and I do not, I will kill myself.

PRIMUS (*holding her*). I will not let you! (*To* ALQUIST.) Man, you
shall kill neither of us!

ALQUIST. Why?

PRIMUS. We\-- we\-- belong to each other

ALQUIST (*almost in tears*). Go, Adam; go, Eve. The world is yours.

\[HELENA *and* PRIMUS *embrace and go out arm in arm as the curtain
falls.*\]
