---
title: R.U.R.
author: Karel Capeck
---

# Act One

## CENTRAL OFFICE OF THE FACTORY OF ROSSUM\'S UNIVERSAL ROBOTS

Central office of the factory of Rossum\'s Universal Robots. Entrance on
the right. The windows on the front wall look out on the rows of factory
chimneys. On the left more managing departments. DOMIN is sitting in the
revolving chair at a large American writing table. On the left-hand wall
large maps showing steamship and railroad routes. On the right-hand wall
are fastened printed placards. (\"Robot\'s Cheapest Labor,\" and so on.)
In contrast to these wall fittings, the floor is covered with a splendid
Turkish Carpet, a sofa, leather armchair, and filing cabinets. At a desk
near the windows SULLA is typing letters.

DOMIN (*dictating*). Ready?

SULLA. Yes.

DOMIN. To E.M. McVicker and Co., Southampton, England. \"We undertake no
guarantee for goods damaged in transit. As soon as the consignment was
taken on board we drew your captain\'s attention to the fact that the
vessel was unsuitable for the transport of Robots, and we are therefore
not responsible for spoiled freight. We beg to remain, for Rossum\'s
Universal Robots. Yours truly.\" (SULLA, *who has sat motionless during
dictation, now types rapidly for a few seconds, then stops, withdrawing
the completed letter.*) Ready?

SULLA. Yes.

DOMIN. Another letter. To the E. B. Huyson Agency, New York, U.S.A. \"We
beg to acknowledge receipt of order for five thousand Robots. As you are
sending your own vessel, please dispatch as cargo equal quantities of
soft and hard coal for R.U.R., the same to be credited as part payment
of the amount due to us. We beg to remain, for Rossum\'s Universal
Robots. Yours truly.\" (SULLA *repeats the rapid typing.*) Ready?

SULLA. Yes.

DOMIN. Another letter. \"Friedrichswerks, Hamburg, Germany. We beg to
acknowledge receipt of order for fifteen thousand Robots.\" (*Telephone
rings.*) Hello! This is the Central Office. Yes. Certainly. Well, send
them a wire. Good. (*Hangs up telephone.*) Where did I leave off?

SULLA. \"We beg to acknowledge receipt of order for fifteen thousand
Robots.\"

DOMIN: Fifteen thousand R. Fifteen thousand R.\


\[*Enter* MARIUS.\]Well, what is it?


MARIUS. There\'s a lady, sir, asking to see you.

DOMIN. A lady? Who is she?

MARIUS. I don\'t know, sir. She brings this card of introduction.

DOMIN (*reads the card*). Ah, from President Glory. Ask her to come in.

MARIUS. Please step this way. (*Exit* MARIUS.)

\[*Enter* HELENA GLORY.\]

HELENA. How do you do?

DOMIN. How do you do. (*Standing up.*) What can I do for you?

HELENA. You are Mr. Domin, the General Manager.

DOMIN. I am.

HELENA. I have come\--

DOMIN. With President Glory\'s card. That is quite sufficient.

HELENA. President Glory is my father. I am Helena Glory.

DOMIN. Miss Glory, this is such a great honor for us to be allowed to
welcome our great President\'s daughter, that\--

HELENA. That you can\'t show me the door?

DOMIN. Please sit down. Sulla, you may go. (*Exit* SULLA.) (*Sitting
down.*) How can I be of service to you, Miss Glory?

HELENA. I have come\--

DOMIN. To have a look at our famous works where people are manufactured.
Like all visitors. Well, there is no objection.

HELENA. I thought it was forbidden to\--

DOMIN. To enter the factory. Yes, of course. Everybody comes here with
someone\'s visiting card, Miss Glory.

HELENA. And you show them\--

DOMIN. Only certain things. The manufacture of artificial people is a
secret process.

HELENA. If you only knew how enormously that\--

DOMIN. Interests me. Europe\'s talking about nothing else.

HELENA. Why don\'t you let me finish speaking?

DOMIN. I beg your pardon. Did you want to say something different?

HELENA. I only wanted to ask\--

DOMIN. Whether I could make a special exception in your case and

show you our factory. Why, certainly, Miss Glory.

HELENA. How do you know I wanted to say that?

DOMIN. They all do. But we shall consider it a special honor to show you
more than we do the rest.

HELENA. Thank you.

DOMIN. But you must agree not to divulge the least\...

HELENA (*standing up and giving him her hand*). My word of honor.

DOMIN. Thank you. Won\'t you raise your veil?

HELENA. Of course. You want to see whether I\'m a spy or not. I beg your
pardon.

DOMIN. What is it?

HELENA. Would you mind releasing my hand?

DOMIN (*releasing it*). I beg your pardon.

HELENA (*raising her veil*). How cautious you have to be here, don\'t
you?

DOMIN (*observing her with deep interest*). Hm, of course\-- we\-- that
is\--

HELENA. But what is it? What\'s the matter?

DOMIN. I\'m remarkably pleased. Did you have a pleasant crossing?

HELENA. Yes.

DOMIN No difficulty?

HELENA. Why?

DOMIN. What I mean to say is\-- you\'re so young.

HELENA. May we go straight into the factory?

DOMIN. Yes. Twenty-two, I think.

HELENA. Twenty-two what?

DOMIN. Years.

HELENA. Twenty-one. Why do you want to know?

DOMIN. Because\-- as\-- (*With enthusiasm.*) you will make a long stay,
won\'t you?

HELENA. That depends on how much of the factory you show me.

DOMIN. Oh, hang the factory. Oh, no, no, you shall see everything, Miss
Glory. Indeed you shall. Won\'t you sit down?

HELENA *(crossing to couch and sitting).* Thank you.

DOMIN. But first would you like to hear the story of the invention?

HELENA. Yes, indeed.

DOMIN (*observes HELENA with rapture, and reels off rapidly).* It was in
the year 1920 that old Rossum, the great physiologist, who was then
quite a young scientist, took himself to this distant island for the
purpose of studying the ocean fauna, full stop. On this occasion he
attempted by chemical synthesis to imitate the living matter known as
protoplasm until he suddenly discovered a substance which behaved
exactly like living matter although its chemical composition was
different. That was in the year of 1932, exactly four hundred and forty
years after the discovery of America. Whew!

HELENA. Do you know that by heart?

DOMIN. Yes. You see, physiology is not in my line. Shall I go on?

HELENA. Yes, please.

DOMIN. And then, Miss Glory, old Rossum wrote the following among his
chemical specimens: \"Nature has found only one method of organizing
living matter. There is, however, another method, more simple, flexible
and rapid, which has not yet occurred to nature at all. This second
process by which life can be developed was discovered by me today.\" Now
imagine him, Miss Glory, writing those wonderful words over some
colloidal mess that a dog wouldn\'t look at. Imagine him sitting over a
test tube, and thinking how the whole tree of life would grow from it,
how all animals would proceed from it, beginning with some sort of
beetle and ending with a man. A man of different substance from us. Miss
Glory, that was a tremendous moment.

HELENA. Well?

DOMIN. Now, the thing was how to get the life out of the test tubes, and
hasten development and form organs, bones and nerves and so on, and find
such substances as catalytics, enzymes, hormones, and so forth, in
short\-- you understand?

HELENA. Not much, I\'m afraid.

DOMIN. Never mind. You see, with the help of his tinctures he could make
whatever he wanted. He could have produced a Medusa with the brain of a
Socrates or a worm fifty yards long. But being without a grain of humor,
he took it into his head to make a vertebrate or perhaps a man. This
artificial living matter of his had a raging thirst for life. It didn\'t
mind being sewn or mixed together. That couldn\'t be done with natural
albumen. And that\'s how he set about it.

HELENA. About what?

DOMIN. About imitating nature. First of all he tried making an
artificial dog. That took him several years, and resulted in a sort of
stunted calf which died in a few days. I\'ll show it to you in the
museum. And then old Rossum started on the manufacture of man.

HELENA. And I must divulge this to nobody?

DOMIN. To nobody in the world.

HELENA. What a pity that it\'s to be found in all the schoolbooks of
both Europe and America.

DOMIN. Yes. But do you know what isn\'t in the schoolbooks? That old
Rossum was mad. Seriously, Miss Glory, you must keep this to yourself.
The old crank wanted to actually make people.

HELENA. But you do make people.

DOMIN. Approximately, Miss Glory. But old Rossum meant it literally. He
wanted to become a sort of scientific substitute for God. He was a
fearful materialist, and that\'s why he did it all. His sole purpose was
nothing more or less than to prove that God was no longer necessary. Do
you know anything about anatomy?

HELENA. Very little.

DOMIN. Neither do I. Well, he then decided to manufacture everything as
in the human body. I\'ll show you in the museum the bungling attempt it
took him ten years to produce. It was to have been a man, but it lived
for three days only. Then up came young Rossum, an engineer. He was a
wonderful fellow, Miss Glory. When he saw what a mess of it the old man
was making, he said: \"It\'s absurd to spend ten years making a man. If
you can\'t make him quicker than nature, you might as well shut up
shop.\" Then he set about learning anatomy himself

HELENA. There\'s nothing about that in the schoolbooks.

DOMIN. No. The schoolbooks are full of paid advertisements, and rubbish
at that. What the schoolbooks say about the united efforts of the two
great Rossums is all a fairy tale. They used to have dreadful rows. The
old atheist hadn\'t the slightest conception of industrial matters, and
the end of it was that young Rossum shut him up in some laboratory or
other and let him fritter the time away with his monstrosities, while he
himself started on the business from an engineer\'s point of view. Old
Rossum cursed him, and before he died he managed to botch up two
physiological honors. Then one day they found him dead in the
laboratory. And that\'s his whole story.

HELENA. And what about the young man?

DOMIN. Well, anyone who has looked into human anatomy will have seen at
once that man is too complicated, and that a good engineer could make
him more simply. So young Rossum began to overhaul anatomy and tried to
see what could be left out or simplified. In short\-- but this isn\'t
boring you, Miss Glory?

HELENA. No indeed. You\'re\-- it\'s awfully interesting.

DOMIN. So young Rossum said to himself: \"A man is something that feels
happy, plays the piano, likes going for a walk, and in fact wants to do
a whole lot of things that are really unnecessary.

HELENA. Oh.

DOMIN. That are unnecessary when he wants, let us say, to weave or
count. Do you play the piano?

HELENA. Yes.

DOMIN. That\'s good. But a working machine must not play the piano, must
not feel happy, must not do a whole lot of other things. A gasoline
motor must not have tassels or ornaments, Miss Glory. And to manufacture
artificial workers is the same thing as to manufacture gasoline motors.
The process must be of the simplest, and the product of the best from a
practical point of view. What sort of worker do you think is the best
from a practical point of view?

HELENA. What?

DOMIN. What sort of worker do you think is the best from a practical
point of view?

HELENA. Perhaps the one who is most honest and hard-working.

DOMIN. No; the one that is the cheapest. The one whose requirements are
the smallest. Young Rossum invented a worker with the minimum amount of
requirements. He had to simplify him. He rejected everything that did
not contribute directly to the progress of work\-- everything that makes
man more expensive. In fact, he rejected man and made the Robot. My dear
Miss Glory, the Robots are not people. Mechanically they are more
perfect than we are; they have an enormously developed intelligence, but
they have no soul.

HELENA. How do you know they\'ve no soul?

DOMIN. Have you ever seen what a Robot looks like inside?

HELENA. No.

DOMIN. Very neat, very simple. Really, a beautiful piece of work. Not
much in it, but everything in flawless order. The product of an engineer
is technically at a higher pitch of perfection than a product of nature.

HELENA. But man is supposed to be the product of God.

DOMIN. All the worse. God hasn\'t the least notion of modern
engineering. Would you believe that young Rossum then proceeded to play
at being God?

HELENA. How do you mean?

DOMIN. He began to manufacture Super-Robots. Regular giants they were.
He tried to make them twelve feet tall. But you wouldn\'t believe what a
failure they were.

HELENA. A failure?

DOMIN. Yes. For no reason at all their limbs used to keep snapping off.
Evidently our planet is too small for giants. Now we make only Robots of
normal size and of very high-class human finish.

HELENA. I saw the first Robots at home. The town council bought them
for\-- I mean engaged them for work.

DOMIN. Bought them, dear Miss Glory. Robots are bought and sold.

HELENA These were employed as street sweepers. I saw them sweeping. They
were so strange and quiet.

DOMIN. Rossum\'s Universal Robot factory doesn\'t produce a uniform
brand of Robots. We have Robots of finer and coarser grades. The best
will live about twenty-years. (*He rings for* MARIUS.)

HELENA. Then they die?

DOMIN. Yes, they get used up.

\[*Enter* MARIUS.\]

Marius, bring in samples of the Manual Labor Robot. (*Exit* MARIUS.)

I\'ll show you specimens of the two extremes. This first grade is
comparatively inexpensive and is made in vast quantities.

\[MARIUS *reenters with two Manual Labor Robots.*\]

There you are; as powerful as a small tractor. Guaranteed to have
average intelligence. That will do, Marius. (MARIUS *exits with
Robots.*)


HELENA. They make me feel so strange.

DOMIN *(rings).* Did you see my new typist? (*He rings for* SULLA)

HELENA. I didn\'t notice her.

\[*Enter* SULLA.\]

DOMIN. Sulla, let Miss Glory see you.

HELENA. So pleased to meet you. You must find it terribly dull in this
out-of-the-way spot, don\'t you?

SULLA. I don\'t know, Miss Glory.

HELENA. Where do you come from?

SULLA. From the factory.

HELENA. Oh, you were born there?

SULLA. I was made there.

HELENA. What?

DOMIN (*laughing*). Sulla is a Robot, best grade.

HELENA. Oh, I beg your pardon.

DOMIN. Sulla isn\'t angry. See, Miss Glory, the kind of skin we make.
(*Feels the skin on* SULLA\'S *face.*) Feel her face.

HELENA. Ah, no, no.

DOMIN. You wouldn\'t know that she\'s made of different material from
us, would you? Turn round, Sulla.

HELENA. Oh, stop, stop.

DOMIN. Talk to Miss Glory, Sulla.

SULLA. Please sit down. (HELENA *sits.*) Did you have a pleasant
crossing?

HELENA. Oh, yes, certainly.

SULLA. Don\'t go back on the *Amelia,* Miss Glory. The barometer is
falling steadily. Wait for the *Pennsylvania.* That\'s a good, powerful
vessel.

DOMIN. What\'s its speed?

SULLA. Twenty knots. Fifty thousand tons. Captain Harpy, eight
boilers\--

DOMIN. That\'ll do Sulla. Now show us your knowledge of French.

HELENA. You know French?

SULLA. I know four languages. I can write: Dear Sir, Monsieur, Geehrter
Herr, Cteny pane.

HELENA (*jumping up*). Oh, that\'s absurd! Sulla isn\'t a Robot. Sulla
is a girl like me. Sulla, this is outrageous! Why do you take part in
such a hoax?

SULLA. I am a Robot.

HELENA No, no, you are not telling the truth. I know they\'ve forced you
to do it for an advertisement. Sulla, you are a girl like me, aren\'t
you?

DOMIN. I\'m sorry, Miss Glory. Sulla is a Robot.

HELENA. It\'s a lie!

DOMIN. What? (*Rings.*) Excuse me, Miss Glory, then I must convince you.


\[*Enter* MARIUS.\]


Marius, take Sulla into the dissecting room, and tell them to open her
up at once.

HELENA. Where?

DOMIN. Into the dissecting room. When they\'ve cut her open, you can go
and have a look.

HELENA. No, no!

DOMIN. Excuse me, you spoke of lies.

HELENA. You wouldn\'t have her killed?

DOMIN. You can\'t kill machines.

HELENA. Don\'t be afraid, Sulla; I won\'t let you go. Tell me, my dear,
are they always so cruel to you? You mustn\'t put up with it, Sulla. You
mustn\'t.

SULLA. I am a Robot.

HELENA. That doesn\'t matter. Robots are just as good as we are. Sulla,
you wouldn\'t let yourself be cut to pieces?

SULLA. Yes.

HELENA. Oh, you\'re not afraid of death, then?

SULLA. I cannot tell, Miss Glory.

HELENA. Do you know what would happen to you in there?

SULLA. Yes, I should cease to move.

HELENA. How dreadful!

DOMIN. Marius, tell Miss Glory what you are.

MARIUS. Marius, the Robot.

DOMIN. Would you take Sulla into the dissecting room?

MARIUS. Yes.

DOMIN, Would you be sorry for her?

MARIUS. I cannot tell.

DOMIN. She would cease to move. They would put her into the stamping
mill.

DOMIN. That is death, Marius. Aren\'t you afraid of death?

MARIUS. No.

DOMIN. You see, Miss Glory, the Robots have no interest in life. They
have no enjoyments. They are less than so much grass.

HELENA. Oh, stop. Send them away.

DOMIN. Marius, Sulla, you may go.

\[*Exeunt* SULLA and MARIUS.\]

HELENA. How terrible! It\'s outrageous what you are doing.

DOMIN. Why outrageous?

HELENA. I don\'t know, but it is. Why do you call her Sulla?

DOMIN. Isn\'t it a nice name?

HELENA. It\'s a man\'s name. Sulla was a Roman general.

DOMIN. Oh, we thought that Marius and Sulla were lovers.

HELENA. Marius and Sulla were generals and fought against each other in
the year\-- I\'ve forgotten now.

DOMIN. Come here to the window.

HELENA. What?

DOMIN. Come here. What do you see?

HELENA. Bricklayers.

DOMIN. Robots. All our work people are Robots. And down there, can you
see anything?

HELENA. Some sort of office.

DOMIN. A countinghouse. And in it\--

HELENA. A lot of officials.

DOMIN. Robots. All our officials are Robots. And when you see the
factory\-- (*Factory whistle blows.*) Noon. We have to blow the whistle
because the Robots don\'t know when to stop work. In two hours I will
show you the kneading trough.

HELENA. Kneading trough?

DOMIN. The pestle for beating up the paste. In each one we mix the
ingredients for a thousand Robots at one operation. Then there are the
vats for the preparation of liver, brains, and so on. Then you will see
the bone factory. After that I\'ll show you the spinning mill.

HELENA. Spinning mill?

DOMIN. Yes. For weaving nerves and veins. Miles and miles of digestive
tubes pass through it at a time.

HELENA. Mayn\'t we talk about something else?

DOMIN. Perhaps it would be better. There\'s only a handful of us among a
hundred thousand Robots, and not one woman. We talk about nothing but
the factory all day, every day. It\'s just as if we were under a curse,
Miss Glory.

HELENA. I\'m sorry I said you were lying. (*A knock at the door.*)

DOMIN. Come in.

\[*From the right enter* MR. FABRY, DR. GALL, DR. HALLEMEIER, MR.
ALQUIST.\]

DR. GALL. I beg your pardon, I hope we don\'t intrude.

DOMIN. Come in. Miss Glory, here are Alquist, Fabry, Gall, Hallemeier.

This is President Glory\'s daughter.

HELENA. How do you do.

FABRY. We had no idea\--

DR. GALL. Highly honored, I\'m sure\--

ALQUIST. Welcome, Miss Glory.

\[BUSMAN *rushes in from the right.*\]

BUSMAN. Hello, what\'s up?

DOMIN. Come in. Busman. This is Busman, Miss Glory. This is President
Glory\'s daughter.

BUSMAN. By Jove, that\'s fine! Miss Glory may we send a cablegram to the
papers about your arrival?

HELENA. No, no, please don\'t.

DOMIN. Sit down please, Miss Glory.

BUSMAN. Allow me\-- (*Dragging up armchairs.*)

DR. GALL. Please\--

FABRY. Excuse me\--

ALQUIST. What sort of crossing did you have?

DR. GALL. Are you going to stay long?

FABRY. What do you think of the factory, Miss Glory?

HALLEMEIER. Did you come over on the *Amelia*?

DOMIN. Be quiet and let Miss Glory speak.

HELENA (*to* DOMIN). What am I to speak to them about?

DOMIN. Anything you like.

HELENA. Shall may I speak quite frankly.

DOMIN. Why, of course.

HELENA (*wavering, then in desperate resolution*). Tell me, doesn\'t it
ever distress you the way you are treated?

FABRY. By whom, may I ask?

HELENA. Why, everybody.

ALQUJST. Treated?

DR. GALL. What makes you think\--?

HELENA. Don\'t you feel that you might be living a better life?

DR. GALL. Well, that depends on what you mean, Miss Glory.

HELENA. I mean that it\'s perfectly outrageous. It\'s terrible.
(*Standing up.*) The whole of Europe is talking about the way you\'re
being treated. That\'s why I came here, to see for myselt and it\'s a
thousand times worse than could have been imagined. How can you put up
with it?

ALQUIST. Put up with what?

HELENA. Good heavens, you are living creatures, just like us, like the
whole of Europe, like the whole world. It\'s disgraceful that you must
live like this.

BUSMAN. Good gracious, Miss Glory.

FABRY. Well, she\'s not far wrong. We live here just like red Indians.

HELENA. Worse than red Indians. May I, oh, may I call you brothers?

BUSMAN. Why not?

HELENA. Brothers, I have not come here as the President\'s daughter. I
have come on behalf of the Humanity League. Brothers, the Humanity
League now has over two hundred thousand members. Two hundred thousand
people are on your side, and offer you their help.

BUSMAN. Two hundred thousand people! Miss Glory, that\'s a tidy lot. Not
bad.

FABRY. I\'m always telling you there\'s nothing like good old Europe.
You see, they\'ve not forgotten us. They\'re offering us help.

DR. GALL. What help? A theater, for instance?

HALLEMEIER. An orchestra?

SELENA. More than that.

ALQUIST. Just you?

HELENA. Oh, never mind about me. I\'ll stay as Long as it is necessary.

BUSMAN. By Jove, that\'s good.

ALQUIST. Domin, I\'m going to get the best room ready for Miss Glory.

DOMIN. Just a minute. I\'m afraid that Miss Glory is of the opinion that
she has been talking to Robots.

HELENA. Of course.

DOMIN. I\'m sorry. These gentlemen are human beings just like us.

HELENA. You\'re not Robots?

BUSMAN. Not Robots.

HALLEMEIER. Robots indeed!

DR. GALL. No, thanks.

FABRY. Upon my honor, Miss Glory, we aren\'t Robots.

HELENA (*to* DOMIN). Then why did you tell me that all your officials
are Robots?

DOMIN. Yes, the officials, but not the managers. Allow me, Miss Glory:
this is Mr. Fabry, General Technical Manager of R.U.R; Dr. Gall, Head of
the Physiological and Experimental Department; Dr. Hallemeier, Head of
the Institute for the Psychological Training of Robots; Consul Busman,
General Business Manager; and Alquist, Head of the Building Department
of R.U.R.

ALQUIST. Just a builder.

HELENA. Excuse me, gentlemen, for\-- for\-- Have I done something
dreadful?

ALQUIST. Not at all, Miss Glory. Please sit down.

HELENA. I\'m a stupid girl. Send me back by the first ship.

DR. GALL. Not for anything in the world, Miss Glory. Why should we send
you back?

HELENA. Because you know I\'ve come to disturb your Robots for you.

DOMIN. My dear Miss Glory, we\'ve had close upon a hundred saviors and
prophets here. Every ship brings us some. Missionaries, anarchists,
Salvation Army, all sorts. It\'s astonishing what a number of churches
and idiots there are in the world.

HELENA. And you let them speak to the Robots?

DOMIN. So far we\'ve let them all, why not? The Robots remember
everything, but that\'s all. They don\'t even laugh at what the people
say. Really, it is quite incredible. If it would amuse you, Miss Glory,
I\'ll take you over to the Robot warehouse. It holds about three hundred
thousand of them.

BUSMAN. Three hundred and forty-seven thousand.

DOMIN. Good! And you can say whatever you like to them. You can read the
Bible, recite the multiplication table, whatever you please. You can
even preach to them about human rights.

HELENA. Oh, I think that if you were to show them a little love\--

FABRY. Impossible, Miss Glory. Nothing is harder to like than a Robot.

HELENA. What do you make them for, then?

BUSMAN. Ha, ha, ha, that\'s good! What are Robots made for?

FABRY. For work, Miss Glory! One Robot can replace two and a half
workmen. The human machine, Miss Glory, was terribly imperfect. It had
to be removed sooner or later.

BUSMAN. It was too expensive.

FABRY. It was not effective. It no longer answers the requirements of
modern engineering. Nature has no idea of keeping pace with modern
labor. For example: from a technical point of view, the whole of
childhood is a sheer absurdity. So much time lost. And then again\--

HELENA. Oh, no! No!

FABRY. Pardon me. But kindly tell me what is the real aim of your
League\-- the\-- the Humanity League.

HELENA. Its real purpose is to\-- to protect the Robots\-- and\-- and
ensure good treatment for them.

FABRY. Not a bad object, either. A machine has to be treated properly.
Upon my soul, I approve of that. I don\'t like damaged articles. Please,
Miss Glory, enroll us all as contributing, or regular, or foundation
members of your League.

HELENA. No, you don\'t understand me. What we really want is to\-- to
liberate the Robots.

HALLEMEIER. How do you propose to do that?

HELENA. They are to be\--to be dealt with like human beings.

HALLEMEIER. Aha. I suppose they\'re to vote? To drink beer? To order us
about?

HELENA. Why shouldn\'t they drink beer?

HALLEMEIER Perhaps they\'re even to receive wages?

HELENA. Of course they are.

HALLEMEIER Fancy that, now! And what would they do with their wages,
pray?

HELENA. They would buy\-- what they need.. what pleases them.

HALLEMEIER. That would be very nice, Miss Glory, only there\'s nothing
that does please the Robots. Good heavens, what are they to buy? You can
feed them on pineapples, straw, whatever you like. It\'s all the same to
them; they\'ve no appetite at all. They\'ve no interest in anything,
Miss Glory. Why, hang it all, nobody\'s ever yet seen a Robot smile.

HELENA. Why\... why don\'t you make them happier?

HALLEMEIER. That wouldn\'t do, Miss Glory. They are only workmen.

HELENA. Oh, but they\'re so intelligent.

HALLEMEIER. Confoundedly so, but they\'re nothing else. They\'ve no will
of their own. No passion. No soul.

HELENA. No love?

HALLEMEIER. Love? Rather not. Robots don\'t love. Not even themselves.

HELENA Nor defiance?

HALLEMEIER. Defiance? I don\'t know. Only rarely, from time to time.

HELENA. What?

HALLEMEIER. Nothing particular. Occasionally they seem to go off their
heads. Something like epilepsy, you know. It\'s called Robot\'s cramp.
They\'ll suddenly sling down everything they\'re holding, stand still,
gnash their teeth\-- and then they have to go to the stamping mill.
It\'s evidently some breakdown in the mechanism.

DOMIN. A flaw in the works that has to be removed.

SELENA. No, no, that\'s the soul.

FABRY. Do you think that the soul first shows itself by a gnashing of
teeth?

HELENA. Perhaps it\'s a sort of revolt. Perhaps it\'s just a sign that
there\'s a struggle within. Oh, if you could infuse them with it!

DOMIN. That\'ll be remedied, Miss Glory. Dr. Gall is just making some
experiments\--

DR. GALL. Not with regard to that, Domin. At present I am making pain
nerves.

HELENA. Pain nerves?

DR. GALL. Yes, the Robots feel practically no bodily pain. You see,
young Rossum provided them with too limited a nervous system. We must
introduce suffering.

HELENA. Why do you want to cause them pain?

DR. GALL. For industrial reasons, Miss Glory. Sometimes a Robot does
damage to himself because it doesn\'t hurt him. He puts his hand into
the machine, breaks his finger, smashes his head, it\'s all the same to
him. We must provide them with pain. That\'s an automatic protection
against damage.

HELENA. Will they be happier when they feel pain?

DR. GALL. On the contrary; but they will be more perfect from a
technical point of view.

HELENA. Why don\'t you create a soul for them?

DR. GALL. That\'s not in our power.

FABRY. That\'s not in our interest.

BUSMAN. That would increase the cost of production. Hang it all, my dear
young lady, we turn them out at such a cheap rate. A hundred and fifty
dollars each fully dressed, and fifteen years ago they cost ten
thousand. Five years ago we used to buy the clothes for them. Today we
have our own weaving mill, and now we even export cloth five times
cheaper than other factories. What do you pay a yard for cloth, Miss
Glory?

HELENA. I don\'t know really; I\'ve forgotten.

BUSMAN. Good gracious, and you want to found a Humanity League? It only
costs a third now, Miss Glory. All prices are today a third of what they
were and they\'ll fall still lower, lower, like that.

HELENA. I don\'t understand.

BUSMAN. Why, bless you, Miss Glory, it means that the cost of labor has
fallen. A Robot, food and all, costs three-quarters of a cent per hour.
That\'s mighty important, you know. All factories will go pop like
chestnuts if they don\'t at once buy Robots to lower the cost of
production.

HELENA. And get rid of their workmen?

BUSMAN. Of course. But in the meantime, we\'ve dumped five hundred
thousand tropical Robots down on the Argentine pampas to grow corn.
Would you mind telling me how much you pay a pound for bread?

HELENA. I\'ve no idea.

BUSMAN. Well, I\'ll tell you. It now costs two cents in good old Europe.
A pound of bread for two cents, and the Humanity League knows nothing
about it. Miss Glory, you don\'t realize that even that\'s too
expensive. Why, in five years\' time I\'ll wager\--

HELENA. What?

BUSMAN That the cost of everything won\'t be a tenth of what it is now.
Why, in five years we\'ll be up to our ears in corn and everything else.

ALQUIST. Yes, and all the workers throughout the world will be
unemployed.

DOMIN. Yes, Aiquist, they will. Yes, Miss Glory, they will. But in ten
years Rossum\'s Universal Robots will produce so much corn, so much
cloth, so much everything, that things will be practically without
price. There will be no poverty. All work will be done by living
machines. Everybody will be free from worry and liberated from the
degradation of labor. Everybody will live only to perfect himself.

HELENA. Will he?

DOMIN. Of course. It\'s bound to happen. But then the servitude of man
to man and the enslavement of man to matter will cease. Of course,
terrible things may happen at first, but that simply can\'t be avoided.
Nobody will get bread at the price of life and hatred. The Robots will
wash the feet of the beggar and prepare a bed for him in his house.

ALQUIST. Domin, Domin. What you say sounds too much like Paradise. There
was something good in service and something great in humility. There was
some kind of virtue in toil and weariness.

DOMIN. Perhaps. But we cannot reckon with what is lost when we start out
to transform the world. Man shall be free and supreme; he shall have no
other aim, no other labor, no other care than to perfect himself. He
shall serve neither matter nor man. He will not be a machine and a
device for production. He will be Lord of creation.

BUSMAN. Amen.

FABRY. So be it.

HELENA. You have bewildered me\-- I should like\-- I should like to
believe this.

DR. GALL. You are younger than we are, Miss Glory. You will live to see
it.

HALLEMEIER. True. Don\'t you think Miss Glory might lunch with us?

DR. GALL. Of course. Domin, ask on behalf of us all.

DOMIN. Miss Glory, will you do us the honor?

HELENA. When you know why I\'ve come\--

FABRY. For the League of Humanity, Miss Glory.

HELENA. Oh, in that case, perhaps\--

FABRY. That\'s fine! Miss Glory, excuse me for five minutes.

DR. GALL. Pardon me, too, dear Miss Glory.

BUSMAN. I won\'t be long.

HALLEMEIER. We\'re all very glad you\'ve come.

BUSMAN. We\'ll be back in exactly five minutes. (*All rush out except*
DOMIN *and* HELENA.)

HELENA. What have they all gone off for?

DOMIN. To cook, Miss Glory.

HELENA. To cook what?

DOMIN Lunch. The Robots do our cooking for us and as they\'ve no taste
it\'s not altogether\-- Hallemeier is awfully good at grills, and Gall
can make a kind of sauce, and Busman knows all about omelets.

HELENA. What a feast! And what\'s the specialty of Mr.\--your builder?

DOMIN. Alquist? Nothing. He only lays the table. And Fabry will get
together a little fruit. Our cuisine is very modest, Miss Glory.

HELENA. I wanted to ask you something\--

DOMIN. And I wanted to ask you something, too. (*Looking at watch.*)
Five minutes

HELENA. What did you want to ask me?

DOMIN. Excuse me, you ask first.

HELENA. Perhaps it\'s silly of me, but why do you manufacture female
Robots when\-- when\--

DOMIN. When sex means nothing to them?

HELENA. Yes.

DOMIN. There\'s a certain demand for them, you see. Servants,
saleswomen, stenographers. People are used to it.

HELENA. But\-- but, tell me, are the Robots male and female mutually\--
completely without\--

DOMIN. Completely indifferent to each other, Miss Glory. There\'s no
sign of any affection between them.

HELENA. Oh, that\'s terrible.

DOMIN. Why?

HELENA. It\'s so unnatural. One doesn\'t know whether to be disgusted or
to hate them, or perhaps\--

DOMIN. To pity them?

HELENA. That\'s more like it. What did you want to ask me about?

DOMIN. I should like to ask you, Miss Helena, whether you will marry me?

HELENA. What?

DOMIN. Will you be my wife?

HELENA. No! The idea!

DOMIN (*looking at his watch*). Another three minutes. If you won\'t
marry me you\'ll have to marry one of the other five.

HELENA. But why should I?

DOMIN. Because they\'re all going to ask you in turn.

HELENA. How could they dare to do such a thing?

DOMIN. I\'m very sorry, Miss Glory. It seems they\'ve all fallen in love
with you.

HELENA. Please don\'t let them. I\'ll\-- I\'ll go away at once.

DOMIN. Helena, you wouldn\'t be so cruel as to refuse us.

HELENA. But, but\-- I can\'t marry all six.

DOMIN. No, but one anyhow. If you don\'t want me, marry Fabry.

HELENA. I won\'t.

DOMIN. Dr. Gall.

HELENA. I don\'t want any of you.

DOMIN (*again looking at his watch*). Another two minutes.

HELENA. I think you\'d marry any woman who came here.

DOMIN. Plenty of them have come, Helena.

HELENA. Young?

DOMIN. Yes.

HELENA. Why didn\'t you marry one of them?

DOMIN. Because I didn\'t lose my head. Until today. Then, as soon as you
lifted your veil\-- (HELENA *turns her head away*.) Another minute.

HELENA. But I don\'t want you, I tell you.

DOMIN (*laying both hands on her shoulders*). One more minute! Now you
either have to look me straight in the eye and say \"No,\" violently,
and then I\'ll leave you alone\-- or\-- (HELENA *looks at him.*)

HELENA (*turning away*). You\'re mad!

DOMIN. A man has to be a bit mad, Helena. That\'s the best thing about
him.

HELENA. You are\-- you are\--

DOMIN. Well?

HELENA. Don\'t, you\'re hurting me.

DOMIN. The last chance, Helena. Now, or never\--

HELENA. But\-- but, Harry\-- (*He embraces and kisses her. Knocking at
the door.*)

DOMIN (*releasing her*). Come in.

\[*Enter* BUSMAN, DR. GALL, *and* HALLEMEIER *in kitchen aprons.* FABRY
*with a bouquet and* ALQUIST *with a napkin over his arm.*\]

Have you finished your job?

BUSMAN. Yes.

DOMIN. So have we.


\[*For a moment the men stand nonplussed; but as soon as they realize
what DOMIN means they rush forward, congratulating* HELENA *and* DOMIN
*as the curtains falls.*\]

