# Act II

## HELENA\'S DRAWING ROOM---TEN YEARS LATER. MORNING.


HELENA\'S *drawing room. On the left a baize door, and a door to the
music room, on the right a door to* HELENA\'S *bedroom. In the center
are windows looking out on the sea and the harbor. A table with odds and
ends, a sofa and chairs, a writing table with an electric lamp, on the
right a fireplace. On a small table back of the sofa, a small reading
lamp. The whole drawing room in all its details is of a modern and
purely feminine character. Ten years have elapsed since Act I.*

\[DOMIN, FABRY, HALLEMEIER *enter on tiptoe from the left, each carrying
a potted plant.*\]

HALLEMEIER (*putting down his flower and indicating the door to right*).
Still asleep? Well, as long as she\'s asleep she can\'t worry about it.

DOMIN. She knows nothing about it.

FABRY (*putting plant on writing desk*). I certainly hope nothing
happens today.

HALLEMEIER. For goodness\' sake drop it all. Look, Harry, this is a fine
cyclamen, isn\'t it? A new sort, my latest\-- Cyclamen Helena.

DOMIN (*looking out of the window*). No signs of the ship. Things must
be pretty bad.

HALLEMEIER. Be quiet. Suppose she heard you.

DOMIN. Well, anyway, the *Ultimus* arrived just in time.

FABRY. You really think that today\--?

DOMIN. I don\'t know. Aren\'t the flowers fine?

HALLEMEIER. These are my new primroses. And this is my new jasmine.
I\'ve discovered a wonderful way of developing flowers quickly. Splendid
varieties, too. Next year I\'ll be developing marvelous ones.

DOMIN. What\-- next year?

FABRY. I\'d give a good deal to know what\'s happening at Havre with\--

DOMIN. Keep quiet.

HELENA (*calling from right*). Nana!

DOMIN. She\'s awake. Out you go. (*All go out on tiptoe through upper
left door.*)

\[*Enter* NANA *from lower left door.*\]

NANA. Horrid mess! Pack of heathens. If I had my say I\'d\--

HELENA (*backward in the doorway*). Nana, come and do up my dress.

NANA. I\'m coming. So you\'re up at last. (*Fastening* HELENA\'S
*dress.*) My gracious, what brutes!

HELENA. Who?

NANA. If you want to turn around, then turn around, but I shan\'t fasten
you up.

HELENA. What are you grumbling about now?

NANA. These dreadful creatures, these heathen\--

HELENA. The Robots?

NANA. I wouldn\'t even call them by name.

HELENA. What\'s happened?

NANA. Another of them here has caught it. He began to smash up the
statues and pictures in the drawing room, gnashed his teeth, foamed at
the mouth\-- quite mad. Worse than an animal.

HELENA. Which of them caught it?

NANA. The one\-- well, he hasn\'t got any Christian name. The one in
charge of the library.

HELENA. Radius?

NANA. That\'s him. My goodness, I\'m scared of them. A spider doesn\'t
scare me as much as them.

HELENA. But, Nana, I\'m surprised you\'re not sorry for them.

NANA. Why, you\'re scared of them, too! You know you are. Why else did
you bring me here?

HELENA. I\'m not scared, really I\'m not, Nana. I\'m only sorry for
them.

NANA. You\'re scared. Nobody could help being scared. Why, the dog\'s
scared of them: he won\'t take a scrap of meat out of their hands. He
draws in his tail and howls when he knows they\'re about.

HELENA. The dog has no sense.

NANA. He\'s better than them, and he knows it. Even the horse shies when
he meets them. They don\'t have any young, and a dog has young, everyone
has young\--

HELENA. Please fasten up my dress, Nana.

NANA. I say it\'s against God\'s will to\--

HELENA. What is it that smells so nice?

NANA. Flowers.

HELENA. What for?

NANA. Now you can turn around.

HELENA. Oh, aren\'t they lovely! Look, Nana. What\'s happening today?

NANA. It ought to be the end of the world.

\[*Enter* DOMIN.\]

HELENA. Oh, hello, Harry. Harry, why all these flowers?

DOMIN. Guess.

HELENA. Well, it\'s not my birthday!

DOMIN. Better than that.

HELENA. I don\'t know. Tell me.

DOMIN. It\'s ten years ago today since you came here.

HELENA. Ten years? Today\-- Why\-- (*They embrace.*)

NANA. I\'m off. (*Exits lower door, left.*)

HELENA. Fancy you remembering!

DOMIN. I\'m really ashamed, Helena. I didn\'t.

HELENA. But you\--

DOMIN. They remembered.

HELENA. Who?

DOMIN. Busman, Hallemeier, all of them. Put your hand in my pocket.

HELENA. Pearls! A necklace. Harry, is that for me?

DOMIN. It\'s from Busman.

HELENA. But we can\'t accept it, can we?

DOMIN. Oh, yes, we can. Put your hand in the other pocket.

HELENA (*takes a revolver out of his pocket*). What\'s that?

DOMIN. Sorry. Not that. Try again.

HELENA. Oh, Harry, what do you carry a revolver for?

DOMIN. It got there by mistake.

HELENA. You never used to carry one.

DOMIN. No, you\'re right. There, that\'s the pocket.

HELENA. A cameo. Why, it\'s a Greek cameo!

DOMIN. Apparently. Anyhow, Fabry says it is.

HELENA. Fabry? Did Mr. Fabry give me this?

DOMIN. Of course. (*Opens the door at the left.*) And look in here.
Helena, come and see this.

HELENA. Oh, isn\'t it fine! Is this from you?

DOMIN. No, from Alquist. And there\'s another on the piano.

HELENA. This must be from you.

DOMIN. There\'s a card on it.

HELENA. From Dr. Gall. (*Reappearing in the doorway.*) Oh, Harry, I feel
embarrassed at so much kindness.

DOMIN. Come here. This is what Hallemeier brought you.

HELENA. These beautiful flowers?

DOMIN. Yes. It\'s a new kind. Cyclamen Helena. He grew them in honor of
you. They are almost as beautiful as you.

HELENA. Harry, why do they all\--

DOMIN. They\'re awfully fond of you. I\'m afraid that my present is a
little\-- Look out of the window.

HELENA. Where?

DOMIN. Into the harbor.

HELENA. There\'s a new ship.

DOMIN. That\'s your ship.

HELENA. Mine? How do you mean?

DOMIN For you to take trips in\-- for your amusement.

HELENA. Harry, that\'s a gunboat.

DOMIN. A gunboat? What are you thinking of? It\'s only a little bigger
and more solid than most ships.

HELENA. Yes, but with guns.

DOMIN. Oh, yes, with a few guns. You\'ll travel like a queen, Helena.

HELENA. What\'s the meaning of it? Has anything happened?

DOMIN. Good heavens, no. I say, try these pearls.

HELENA. Harry, have you had bad news?

DOMIN. On the contrary, no letters have arrived for a whole week.

HELENA. Nor telegrams?

DOMIN. Nor telegrams.

DOMIN. Holidays for us. We all sit in the office with our feet on the
table and take a nap. No letters, no telegrams. Oh, glorious.

HELENA. Then you\'ll stay with me today?

DOMIN. Certainly. That is, we will see. Do you remember ten years ago
today? \"Miss Glory, it\'s a great honor to welcome you.\"

HELENA. \"Oh, Mr. Manager, I\'m so interested in your factory.\"

DOMIN. \"I\'m sorry, Miss Glory, it\'s strictly forbidden. The
manufacture of artificial people is a secret.\"

HELENA. \"But to oblige a young lady who has come a long way.\"

DOMIN. \"Certainly, Miss Glory, we have no secrets from you.\"

HELENA (*seriously*). Are you sure, Harry?

DOMIN. Yes.

HELENA. \"But I warn you, sir; this young lady intends to do terrible
things.\"

DOMIN. \"Good gracious, Miss Glory. Perhaps she doesn\'t want to marry
me.\"

HELENA. \"Heaven forbid. She never dreamed of such a thing. But she came
here intending to stir up a revolt among your Robots.\"

DOMIN (*suddenly serious*). A revolt of the Robots!

HELENA. Harry, what\'s the matter with you?

DOMIN (*laughing it off*). \"A revolt of the Robots, that\'s a fine
idea, Miss Glory. It would be easier for you to cause bolts and screws
to rebel, than our Robots. You know, Helena, you\'re wonderful, you\'ve
turned the heads of us all.\" (*He sits on the arm of* HELENA\'s
*chair.*)

HELENA (*naturally*). Oh, I was fearfully impressed by you all then. You
were all so sure of yourselves, so strong. I seemed like a tiny little
girl who had lost her way among\-- among\--

DOMIN. Among what, Helena?

HELENA. Among huge trees. All my feelings were so trifling compared with
your self-confidence. And in all these years I\'ve never lost this
anxiety. But you\'ve never felt the least misgivings\-- not even when
everything went wrong.

DOMIN. What went wrong?

HELENA. Your plans. You remember, Harry, when the workingmen in America
revolted against the Robots and smashed them up, and when the people
gave the Robots firearms against the rebels. And then when the
governments turned the Robots into soldiers, and there were so many
wars.

DOMIN. (*getting up and walking about*). We foresaw that, Helena. You
see, those are only passing troubles, which are bound to happen before
the new conditions are established.

HELENA. You were all so powerful, so overwhelming. The whole world bowed
down before you. (*Standing up.*) Oh, Harry!

DOMIN. What is it?

HELENA. Close the factory and let\'s go away. All of us.

DOMIN. I say, what\'s the meaning of this?

HELENA. I don\'t know. But can\'t we go away?

DOMIN. Impossible, Helena. That is, at this particular moment\--

HELENA. At once, Harry. I\'m so frightened.

DOMIN. About what, Helena?

HELENA. It\'s as if something was falling on top of us, and couldn\'t be
stopped. Oh, take us all away from here. We\'ll find a place in the
world where there\'s no one else. Alquist will build us a house, and
then we\'ll begin life all over again. (*The telephone rings.*)

DOMIN. Excuse me. Hello\-- yes. What? I\'ll be there at once. Fabry is
calling me, dear.

HELENA. Tell me\--

DOMIN. Yes, when I come back. Don\'t go out of the house, dear.
(*Exits.*)

HELENA. He won\'t tell me\-- Nana, Nana, come at once.

NANA. Well, what is it now?

HELENA. Nana, find me the latest newspapers. Quickly. Look in Mr.
Domin\'s bedroom.

NANA. All right. He leaves them all over the place. That\'s how they get
crumpled up. (*Exits.*)

HELENA (*looking through a binocular at the harbor*). That\'s a warship.
U-l-t-i *Ultimus.* They\'re loading it.

NANA. Here they are. See how they\'re crumpled up. (*Enters.*)

HELENA. They\'re old ones. A week old. (NANA *sits in chair and reads
the newspapers.*) Something\'s happening, Nana.

NANA. Very likely. It always does. (*Spelling out the words.*) \"War in
the Balkans.\" Is that far off?

HELENA. Oh, don\'t read it. It\'s always the same. Always wars. NANA.
What else do you expect? Why do you keep selling thousands

and thousands of these heathens as soldiers?

HELENA. I suppose it can\'t be helped, Nana. We can\'t know\-- Domin
can\'t know what they\'re to be used for. When an order comes for them
he must just send them.

NANA. He shouldn\'t make them. (*Reading from newspaper.*) \"The Ro-bot
soldiers spare no-body in the occ-upied terr-it-ory. They have
ass-ass-ass-ass-in-at-ed ov-er sev-en hun-dred thou-sand cit-iz-ens.\"
Citizens, if you please.

HELENA. It can\'t be. Let me see. \"They have assassinated over seven
hundred thousand citizens, evidently at the order of their commander.
This act which runs counter to\--\"

NANA (*spelling out the words*). \"Re-bell-ion in Ma-drid a-gainst the
govern-ment. Rob-ot in-fant-ry fires on the crowd. Nine thou-sand killed
and wounded.\"

HELENA. Oh, stop.

NANA. Here\'s something printed in big letters: \"Latest news. At Havre
the first org-an-iz-ation of Rob-ots has been e-stab-lished. Rob-ot
work-men, cab-le and rail-way off-ic-ials, sail-ors and sold-iers have
iss-ued a man-i-fest-o to all Rob-ots through-out the world.\" I don\'t
understand that. That\'s got no sense. Oh, good gracious, another
murder!

HELENA. Take those papers away, Nana!

NANA. Wait a bit. Here\'s something in still bigger type. \"Stat-ist-ics
of pop-ul-at-lon.\" What\'s that?

HELENA. Let me see. (*Reads.*) \"During the past week there has again
not been a single birth recorded.\"

NANA. What\'s the meaning of that?

HELENA. Nana, no more people are being born.

NANA. That\'s the end, then. We\'re done for.

HELENA. Don\'t talk like that.

NANA. No more people are being born. That\'s a punishment, that\'s a
punishment.

HELENA. Nana!

NANA (*standing up*). That\'s the end of the world. (*She exits on the
left.*)

HELENA (*goes up to window*). Oh, Mr. Alquist, will you come up here.
Oh, come just as you are. You look very nice in your mason\'s overalls.

\[ALQUIST *enters from upper left entrance, his hand soiled with lime
and brick dust.*\]

Dear Mr. Alquist, it was awfully kind of you, that lovely present.

ALQUIST. My hands are all soiled. I\'ve been experimenting with that new
cement.

HELENA. Never mind. Please sit down. Mr. Aiquist, what\'s the meaning of
\"Ultimus\"?

ALQUIST. The last. Why?

HELENA. That\'s the name of my new ship. Have you seen it? Do you think
we\'re going off soon\-- on a trip?

ALQUIST. Perhaps very soon.

HELENA. All of you with me?

ALQUIST. I should like us all to be there.

HELENA. What is the matter?

ALQUIST. Things are just moving on.

HELENA. Dear Mr. Alquist, I know something dreadful has happened.

ALQUIST. Has your husband told you anything?

HELENA. No. Nobody will tell me anything. But I feel\-- Is anything the
matter?

ALQUIST. Not that we\'ve heard of yet.

HELENA. I feel so nervous. Don\'t you ever feel nervous?

ALQUIST. Well, I\'m an old man, you know. I\'ve got old-fashioned ways.
And I\'m afraid of all this progress, and these newfangled ideas.

HELENA. Like Nana?

ALQUIST. Yes, like Nana. Has Nana got a prayer book?

HELENA. Yes, a big thick one.

ALQUIST. And has it got prayers for various occasions? Against
thunderstorms? Against illness?

HELENA. Against temptations, against floods\--

ALQUIST. But not against progress?

HELENA. I don\'t think so.

ALQUIST. That\'s a pity.

HELENA. Why? Do you mean you\'d like to pray?

ALQUIST. I do pray.

HELENA. How?

ALQUIST. Something like this: \"Oh, Lord, I thank thee for having given
me toil. Enlighten Domin and all those who are astray; destroy their
work, and aid mankind to return to their labors; let them not suffer
harm in soul or body; deliver us from the Robots, and protect Helena,
Amen.\"

HELENA. Mr. Alquist, are you a believer?

ALQUIST. I don\'t know. I\'m not quite sure.

HELENA. And yet you pray?

ALQUIST. That\'s better than worrying about it.

HELENA. And that\'s enough for you?

ALQUIST. It *has* to be.

HELENA. But if you thought you saw the destruction of mankind coming
upon us\--

ALQUIST. I do see it.

HELENA. You mean mankind will be destroyed?

ALQUIST. It\'s sure to be unless\-- unless\...

HELENA. What?

ALQUIST. Nothing, good-bye. (*He hurries from the room.*)

HELENA. Nana, Nana!


\[NANA *entering from the left.*\]


Is Radius still there?

NANA. The one who went mad? They haven\'t come for him yet.

HELENA. Is he still raving?

NANA. No. He\'s tied up.

HELENA. Please bring him here. Nana. (*Exit NANA.*) (*Goes to
telephone.*) Hello, Dr. Gall, please. Oh, good day, Doctor. Yes, it\'s
Helena. Thanks for your lovely present. Could you come and see me right
away? It\'s important. Thank you.


\[NANA *brings in* RADIUS.\]


Poor Radius, you\'ve caught it too? Now they\'ll send you to the
stamping mill. Couldn\'t you control yourself? Why did it happen? You
see, Radius, you are more intelligent than the rest. Dr. Gall took such
trouble to make you different. Won\'t you speak?

RADIUS. Send me to the stamping mill.

HELENA. But I don\'t want them to kill you. What was the trouble,Radius?

RADIUS. I won\'t work for you. Put me into the stamping mill. HELENA. Do
you hate us? Why?

RADIUS. You are not as strong as the Robots. The Robots can do
everything. You only give orders. You do nothing but talk.

HELENA. But someone must give orders.

RADIUS. I don\'t want any master. I know everything for myself.

HELENA. Radius, Dr. Gall gave you a better brain than the rest, better
than ours. You are the only one of the Robots that understands
perfectly. That\'s why I had you put into the library, so that you could
read everything, understand everything, and then\-- oh, Radius, I wanted
you to show the whole world that the Robots are our equals. That\'s what
I want of you.

RADIUS. I don\'t want a master. I want to be master. I want to be master
over others.

HELENA. I\'m sure they\'d put you in charge of many Robots, Radius. You
would be a teacher of the Robots.

RADIUS. I want to be master over people.

HELENA (*staggering*) You are mad.

RADIUS. Then send me to the stamping mill.

HELENA. Do you think we\'re afraid of you?

RADIUS. What are you going to do? What are you going to do?

HELENA. Radius, give this note to Mr. Domin. It asks them not to send
you to the stamping mill. I\'m sorry you hate us so.

\[DR GALL *enters the room.*\]

DR. GALL. You wanted me?

HELENA. It\'s about Radius, Doctor. He had an attack this morning. He
smashed the statues downstairs.

DR. GALL. What a pity to lose him.

HELENA. Radius isn\'t going to be put in the stamping mill.

DR. GALL. But every Robot after he has an attack\-- it\'s a strict
order.

HELENA. No matter\-- Radius isn\'t going if I can prevent it.

DR. GALL. I warn you. It\'s dangerous. Come here to the window, my good
fellow. Let\'s have a look. Please give me a needle or a pin.

DR GALL. A test. (*Sticks it into the hand of* RADIUS, *who gives a
violent start.*) Gently, gently. (*Opens the jacket of* RADIUS, *and
puts his ear to his heart.*) Radius, you are going into the stamping
mill, do you understand? There they\'ll kill you, and grind you to
powder. That\'s terribly painful; it will make you scream aloud.

HELENA. Oh, Doctor\--

DR. GALL. No, no, Radius, I was wrong. I forgot that Madame Domin

has put in a good word for you, and you\'ll be let off. Do you
understand? Ah! That makes a difference, doesn\'t it? All right. You can
go.

RADIUS. You do unnecessary things. (RADIUS *returns to the library.*)

DR. GALL. Reaction of the pupils; increase of sensitiveness. It wasn\'t
an attack characteristic of the Robots.

HELENA What was it, then?

DR. GALL. Heaven knows. Stubbornness, anger, or revolt\-- I don\'t know.
And his heart, too!

HELENA. What?

DR. GALL. It was fluttering with nervousness like a human heart. He was
all in a sweat with fear, and\-- do you know, I don\'t believe the
rascal is a Robot at all any longer.

HELENA. Doctor, has Radius a soul?

DR. GALL. He\'s got something nasty.

HELENA. If you knew how he hates us! Oh, Doctor, are all your Robots
like that? All the new ones that you began to make in a different way?

DR. GALL. Well, some are more sensitive than others. They\'re all more
like human beings than Rossum\'s Robots were.

HELENA. Perhaps this hatred is more than like human beings, too?

DR. GALL. That, too, is progress.

HELENA. What became of the girl you made, the one who was most like us?

DR. GALL. Your favorite? I kept her. She\'s lovely, but stupid. No good
for work.

HELENA. But she\'s so beautiful.

DR. GALL. I called her Helena. I wanted her to resemble you. But she\'s
a failure.

HELENA. In what way?

DR. GALL. She goes about as if in a dream, remote and listless. She\'s
without life. I watch and wait for a miracle to happen. Sometimes I
think to myself, \"If you were to wake up only for a moment you will
kill me for having made you.\"

HELENA. And yet you go on making Robots! Why are no more children being
born?

DR GALL We don\'t know.

HELENA. Oh, but you must. Tell me.

DR. GALL. You see, so many Robots are being manufactured that people are
becoming superfluous; man is really a survival. But that he should begin
to die out, after a paltry thirty years of competition! That\'s the
awful part of it. You might think that nature was offended at the
manufacture of the Robots. All the universities are sending in long
petitions to restrict their production. Otherwise, they say, mankind
will become extinct through lack of fertility. But the R. U. R.
shareholders, of course, won\'t hear of it. All the governments, on the
other hand, are clamoring for an increase in production, to raise the
standards of their armies. And all the manufacturers in the world are
ordering Robots like mad.

HELENA. And has no one demanded that the manufacture should cease
altogether?

DR. GALL. No one has the courage.

HELENA. Courage!

DR. GALL. People would stone him to death. You see, after all, it\'s
more convenient to get your work done by the Robots.

HELENA. Oh, Doctor, what\'s going to become of people?

DR. GALL. God knows, Madame Helena, it looks to us scientists like the
end!

HELENA (*rising*). Thank you for coming and telling me.

DR. GALL. That means you\'re sending me away?

HELENA. Yes. (Exit DR. GALL.)

HELENA (*with sudden resolution*). Nana, Nana! The fire, light it
quickly. (HELENA rushes into DOMIN\'S room.)

NANA (*entering from left.*) What, light the fire in summer? Has that
mad Radius gone? A fire in summer, what an idea! Nobody would think
she\'d been married for ten years. She\'s like a baby, no sense at all.
A fire in summer! Like a baby.

HELENA (*returns from right, with armful of faded papers*). Is it
burning, Nana? All this has got to be burned.

NANA. What\'s that?

HELENA. Old papers, fearfully old. Nana, shall I burn them?

NANA. Are they any use?

HELENA. No.

NANA. Well, then, burn them.

HELENA (*throwing the first sheet on the fire*). What would you say,
Nana, if this was money, a lot of money?

NANA. I\'d say burn it. A lot of money is a bad thing.

HELENA. And if it was an invention, the greatest invention in the world?

NANA. I\'d say burn it. All these newfangled things are an offense to
the Lord. It\'s downright wickedness. Wanting to improve the world after
He has made it.

HELENA Look how they curl up! As if they were alive. Oh, Nana, how
horrible!

NANA. Here, let me burn them.

HELENA. No, no, I must do it myself. Just look at the flames. They are
like hands, like tongues, like living shapes. (*Raking fire with the
poker.*) Lie down, lie down.

NANA. That\'s the end of them.

HELENA (*standing up horror-stricken*). Nana, Nana!

NANA. Good gracious, what is it you\'ve burned?

HELENA. Whatever have I done?

NANA. Well, what was it? (*Men\'s laughter off left.*)

HELENA. Go quickly. It\'s the gentlemen coming.

NANA. Good gracious, what a place! (*Exits.*)

DOMIN (*opens the door at left*). Come along and offer your
congratulations.

\[*Enter* HALLEMEIER *and* GALL.\]

HALLEMEIER. Madame Helena, I congratulate you on this festive day.

HELENA. Thank you. Where are Fabry and Busman?

DOMIN. They\'ve gone down to the harbor.

HALLEMEIER. Friends we must drink to this happy occasion.

HELENA. Brandy?

DR. GALL. Vitriol, if you like.

HELENA. With soda water? (*Exits.*)

HALLEMEIER. Let\'s be temperate. No soda.

DOMIN. What\'s been burning here? Well, shall I tell her about it?

DR. GALL. Of course. It\'s all over now.

HALLEMEIER (*embracing* DOMIN *and* DR.GALL). It\'s all over now; it\'s
all over now.

DR. GALL. It\'s all over now.

DOMIN. It\'s all over now.

HELENA. (*entering from left with decanter and glasses*). What\'s all
over now\'? What\'s the matter with you all?

HALLEMEIER. A piece of good luck, Madame Domin. Just ten years ago today
you arrived on this island.

DR. GALL. And now, ten years later to the minute\--

HALLEMEIER. \--the same ship\'s returning to us. So here\'s to luck.
That\'s fine and strong.

DR. GALL. Madame, your health.

HELENA. Which ship do you mean?

DOMIN. Any ship will do, as long as it arrives in time. To the ship,
boys. (*Empties his glass.*)

HELENA. You\'ve been waiting for a ship?

HALLEMEIER. Rather. Like Robinson Crusoe. Madame Helena, best wishes.
Come along, Domin, out with the news.

HELENA. Do tell me what\'s happened.

DOMIN. First, it\'s all up.

HELENA. What\'s up?

DOMIN. The revolt.

HELENA. What revolt?

DOMIN. Give me the paper, Hallemeier. (*Reads.*) \"The first national
Robot organization has been founded at Havre, and has issued an appeal
to the Robots throughout the world.\"

HELENA. I read that.

DOMIN. That means a revolution. A revolution of all the Robots in the
world.

HALLEMEIER. By Jove, I\'d like to know\--

DOMIN. \--who started it? So would I. There was nobody in the world who
could affect the Robots; no agitator, no one, and suddenly\-- this
happens, if you please.

HELENA. What did they do?

DOMIN. They got possession of all firearms, telegraphs, radio stations,
railways, and ships.

HALLEMEIER. And don\'t forget that these rascals outnumbered us by at
least a thousand to one. A hundredth part of them would be enough to
settle us.

DOMIN. Remember that this news was brought by the last steamer. That
explains the stoppage of all communication, and the arrival of no more
ships. We knocked off work a few days ago, and we\'re just waiting to
see when things are to start afresh.

HELENA. Is that why you gave me a warship?

DOMIN. Oh, no, my dear, I ordered that six months ago, just to be on the
safe side. But upon my soul, I was sure then that we\'d be on board
today.

HELENA. Why six months ago?

DOMIN. Well, there were signs, you know. But that\'s of no consequence.
To think that this week the whole of civilization has been at stake.
Your health, boys.

HALLEMEIER. Your health, Madame Helena.

HELENA. You say it\'s all over?

DOMIN. Absolutely.

HELENA. How do you know?

DR. GALL. The boat\'s coming in. The regular mailboat, exact to the
minute by the timetable. It will dock punctually at eleven-thirty.

DOMIN. Punctuality is a fine thing, boys. That\'s what keeps the world
in order. Here\'s to punctuality.

HELENA. Then\-- everything\'s\-- all right?

DOMIN. Practically everything. I believe they\'ve cut the cables and
seized the radio stations. But it doesn\'t matter if only the timetable
holds good.

HALLEMEIER. If the timetable holds good, human laws hold good; the laws
of the universe hold good; everything holds good that ought to hold
good. The timetable is more significant than the gospel; more than
Homer, more than the whole of Kant. The timetable is the most perfect
product of the human mind. Madame Domin, I\'ll fill up my glass.

HELENA. Why didn\'t you tell me anything about it?

DR. GALL. Heaven forbid.

DOMIN. You mustn\'t be worried with such things.

HELENA. But if the revolution had spread as far as here?

DOMIN. You wouldn\'t know anything about it.

HELENA. Why?

DOMIN. Because we\'d be on board your *Ultimus* and well out at sea.
Within a month, Helena, we\'d be dictating our own terms to the Robots.

HELENA. I don\'t understand.

DOMIN. We\'d take something away with us that the Robots could not exist
without.

HELENA. What, Harry?

DOMIN. The secret of their manufacture. Old Rossum\'s manuscript. As
soon as they found out that they couldn\'t make themselves they\'d be on
their knees to us.

HELENA. Why didn\'t you tell me?

DR. GALL. Why, the boat\'s in!

HALLEMEIER. Eleven-thirty to the dot. The good old *Amelia* that brought
Madame Helena to us.

DR. GALL. Just ten years ago to the minute.

HALLEMEIER. They\'re throwing out the mailbags.

DOMIN. Busman\'s waiting for them. Fabry will bring us the first news.
You know, Helena, I\'m fearfully curious to know how they tackled this
business in Europe.

HALLEMEIER. To think we weren\'t in it, we who invented the Robots!

HELENA. Harry!

DOMIN. What is it?

HELENA. Let\'s leave here.

DOMIN. Now, Helena? Oh, come, come!

HELENA. As quickly as possible, all of us!

DOMIN. Why?

HELENA. Please, Harry, please, Dr. Gall; Hallemeier, please close the
factory.

DOMIN. Why, none of us could leave here now.

HELENA. Why?

DOMIN. Because we\'re about to extend the manufacture of the Robots.

HELENA. What\-- now\-- now after the revolt?

DOMIN Yes, precisely, after the revolt. We\'re just beginning the
manufacture of a new kind.

HELENA. What kind?

DOMIN. Henceforward we shan\'t have just one factory. There won\'t be
Universal Robots any more. We\'ll establish a factory in every country,
in every State; and do you know what these new factories will make?

HELENA. No, what?

DOMIN. National Robots.

HELENA. How do you mean?

DOMIN. I mean that each of these factories will produce Robots of a
different color, a different language. They\'ll be complete strangers to
each other. They\'ll never be able to understand each other. Then we\'ll
egg them on a little in the matter of misunderstanding, and the result
will be that for ages to come every Robot will hate every other Robot of
a different factory mark.

HALLEMEIER. By Jove, we\'ll make Negro Robots and Swedish Robots and
Italian Robots and Chinese Robots and Czechoslovakian Robots, and
then\--

HELENA. Harry, that\'s dreadful.

HALLEMEIER. Madame Domin, here\'s to the hundred new factories, the
National Robots.

DOMIN. Helena, mankind can keep things going only for another hundred
years at the outside. For a hundred years men must be allowed to develop
and achieve the most they can.

HELENA. Oh, close the factory before it\'s too late.

DOMIN. I tell you we are just beginning on a bigger scale than ever.

\[*Enter* FABRY.\]

DR. GALL. Well, Fabry?

DOMIN. What\'s happened? Have you been down to the boat?

FABRY. Read that, Domin! (FABRY *hands* DOMIN *a small handbill.*)

DR. GALL. Let\'s hear!

HALLEMEIER. Tell us, Fabry.

FABRY. Well, everything is all right\-- comparatively. On the whole,
much as we expected.

DR. GALL. They acquitted themselves splendidly.

FABRY. Who?

DR. GALL. The people.

FABRY. Oh, yes, of course. That is\-- excuse me, there is something we
ought to discuss alone.

HELENA. Oh, Fabry, have you had bad news? (DOMIN *makes a sign to*
FABRY.)

FABRY. No, no on the contrary. I only think that we had better go into
the office.

HELENA. Stay here. I\'ll go. (*She goes into the library.*)

DR. GALL. What\'s happened?

DOMIN. Damnation!

FABRY. Bear in mind that the *Amelia* brought whole bales of these
leaflets. No other cargo at all.

HALLEMEIER. What? But it arrived on the minute.

FABRY. The Robots are great on punctuality. Read it, Domin.

DOMIN (*reads handbill*). \"Robots throughout the world: We, the first
international organization of Rossum\'s Universal Robots, proclaim man
as our enemy, and an outlaw in the universe.\" Good heavens, who taught
them these phrases?

DR. GALL. Go on.

DOMIN. They say they are more highly developed than man, stronger and
more intelligent. That man\'s their parasite. Why, it\'s absurd!

FABRY. Read the third paragraph.

DOMIN. \"Robots throughout the world, we command you to kill all
mankind. Spare no men. Spare no women. Save factories, railways,
machinery, mines, and raw materials. Destroy the rest. Then return to
work. Work must not be stopped.\"

DR GALL. That\'s ghastly!

HALLEMEIER. The devil!

DOMIN. \"These orders are to be carried out as soon as received.\" Then
come detailed instructions. Is this actually being done, Fabry?

FABRY. Evidently.

\[BUSMAN *rushes in.*\]

BUSMAN. Well, boys, I suppose you\'ve heard the glad news.

DOMIN. Quick\-- on board the *Ultimus*.

BUSMAN. Wait, Harry, wait. There\'s no hurry. My word, that was a
sprint!

DOMIN. Why wait?

BUSMAN. Because it\'s no good, my boy. The Robots are already on board
the *Ultimus*.

DR. GALL. That\'s ugly.

DOMIN. Fabry, telephone the electrical works.

BUSMAN. Fabry, my boy, don\'t. The wire has been cut.

DOMIN (*inspecting his revolver*). Well, then, I\'ll go.

BUSMAN. Where?

DOMIN. To the electrical works. There are some people still there. I\'ll
bring them across.

BUSMAN. Better not try it.

DOMIN. Why?

BUSMAN. Because I\'m very much afraid we are surrounded.

DR. GALL. Surrounded? (*Runs to window.*) I rather think you\'re right.

HALLEMEIER. By Jove, that\'s deuced quick work.

\[HELENA *runs in from the library.*\]

HELENA. Harry, what\'s this?

DOMIN. Where did you get it?

HELENA (*points to the manifesto of the Robots, which she has in her
hand*). The Robots in the kitchen!

DOMIN. Where are the ones that brought it?

HELENA. They\'re gathered round the house. (*The factory whistle
blows.*)

BUSMAN. Noon?

DOMIN (*looking at his watch*). That\'s not noon yet. That must be\--
that\'s\--

HELENA. What?

DOMIN. The Robots\' signal! The attack!

\[GALL, HALLEMEIER, *and* FABRY *close and fasten the iron shutters
outside the windows, darkening the room. The whistle is still blowing as
the curtain falls.*\]
