Revolutionaries are able to use utopia as a looking into the future of what society could become. The part of utopia works well with SciFi. Consider in Aelita, the society on mars is in a utopia, while the society in Russia is still in the post revolution reconstruction. A use for SciFi is to consider what a possible utopia could be, and then later work towards that goal, as Stites mentions "Those who took utopia down from the light blue skies of Russian fantasy into living experimentalism enriched the revolutionary process"(10). It is clear from this excerpt that the revolutionaries who were able to sample possibilities for utopia, that may have been expressed in sci-fi, and develop those concepts, were advancing the process of constructing a utopia.

So I think that sci-fi can be the first stage of experimentation for the idea of utopia. If it can be constructed in a sci-fi settings, then the possibility exists that it could be constructed in modern society. Then for the duration of post revolution reconstruction, sci-fi and utopia depicted in sci-fi is important to provide revolutionaries an imagination of the end goal that they are working towards, instead of mealy an intangible idea.

I believe that this article applies to the view of society and utopia in Aelita. Although there are notable differences, in general. Los is living in a post revolution society, and is using day dreams of the utopia that is present on mars, to have a goal to work towards. However, in this case he becomes lost in his dream, and losses his grip on reality.
